intro-sql-access.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Query your database using SQL'
description: 'Run SQL queries over HTTP directly in PostgreSQL'
author: Noémi Ványi
date: 08-31-2023
published: false
slug: sql-query-over-http-intro
---

We are excited to announce that Xata now offers direct SQL access to
your database.

Internally, Xata relies on [PostgreSQL](/docs/concepts/how-it-works)
for storing your data.  We want you to experience the benefits of SQL
beyond the existing Xata API. From now on we support running some SQL
commands over HTTP. The allowed statements are `SELECT`, `INSERT`,
`UPDATE` and `DELETE` with some limitations.

So if there is something that is not covered by the Xata API, you also
have the flexibility to execute your queries using the conventional
Xata approach - using either the SDK or our REST API. Each request can
contain a single SQL statement; currently, support for multiple
statements is not available. You can submit parameterized queries with
parameters, so you are protected from SQL injection attacks.

```json|ts|python
    ```ts
    const { records: myRecord } = await xata.sql<TeamsRecord>`SELECT * FROM teams`;
    ```
    ```python
    records = xata.sql().query("SELECT * FROM \"teams\"")
    ```
    ```json
    // POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql
    {
        "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"teams\""
    }
    ```
```

## How does it work?

![Diagram of PostgreSQL proxy](images/sql-intro.png)

### Database storage

We run a PostgreSQL instance that stores your database. With opening
up the access now you can directly query and edit database rows in
PostgreSQL.

### Authentication and authorization

Xata plays a pivotal role in authenticating and authorizing your
requests. This not only safeguards your data but also ensures that
only legitimate users can access and manipulate the database. If you
have access to the database branch, we validate that your statement is
correct and only contains only allowed SQL keywords and functions.

### Request validation

For queries within the database branch, we go a step further by
validating your SQL statement. We forbid several functions like
`pg_sleep` or database administration commands, as we we run the
database instance for you. We take care of administrator tasks.

If your statement is correct, we run it in PostgreSQL and return the
response, including rows and errors. If your statement has syntax
errors or SQL errors, the error is returned to you. In case of
forbidden or unknown functions, Xata returns unknown function
error. All user errors get HTTP 400 (Bad request) responses with
the error message.

### SQL execution

Assuming your statement is accurate and aligned with the allowed
parameters, Xata proceeds to execute it within the PostgreSQL
instance. This means that if you've requested a `SELECT`, `INSERT`,
`UPDATE`, or `DELETE` operation and you might provided parameters.

When running your SQL statement, we use a dedicated PostgreSQL role
that only has access to the selected database branch objects be it
tables, constraints or indices.

### Response retrieval

We serialize the response from PostgreSQL into JSON. We return at most
1000 rows in a singe response. So please use pagination using `LIMIT`
and `OFFSET` keywords.

You can find more details about the SQL access in the documentation.

## Limitations

As you access your database directly using SQL, the Xata goodies will not
be accessible to you. For example the special `email` Xata type is not safe.
You can only add or edit special data types using the Xata API.

We support one statement per request.


Let us know what you think! If you have any suggestions, questions, or
issues reach out to us on [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) or follow
us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/xata).

Commit message:

Added a temporary image to get the previews workign

intro-sql-access.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Query your database using SQL'
description: 'Run SQL queries over HTTP directly in PostgreSQL'
author: Noémi Ványi
date: 08-31-2023
published: false
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/postgres-full-text-search.png
  alt: SQL access to Xata
slug: sql-query-over-http-intro
---

We are excited to announce that Xata now offers direct SQL access to
your database.

Internally, Xata relies on [PostgreSQL](/docs/concepts/how-it-works)
for storing your data. We want you to experience the benefits of SQL
beyond the existing Xata API. From now on we support running some SQL
commands over HTTP. The allowed statements are `SELECT`, `INSERT`,
`UPDATE` and `DELETE` with some limitations.

So if there is something that is not covered by the Xata API, you also
have the flexibility to execute your queries using the conventional
Xata approach - using either the SDK or our REST API. Each request can
contain a single SQL statement; currently, support for multiple
statements is not available. You can submit parameterized queries with
parameters, so you are protected from SQL injection attacks.

````json|ts|python
    ```ts
    const { records: myRecord } = await xata.sql<TeamsRecord>`SELECT * FROM teams`;
    ```
    ```python
    records = xata.sql().query("SELECT * FROM \"teams\"")
    ```
    ```json
    // POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql
    {
        "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"teams\""
    }
    ```
````

## How does it work?

![Diagram of PostgreSQL proxy](images/sql-intro.png)

### Database storage

We run a PostgreSQL instance that stores your database. With opening
up the access now you can directly query and edit database rows in
PostgreSQL.

### Authentication and authorization

Xata plays a pivotal role in authenticating and authorizing your
requests. This not only safeguards your data but also ensures that
only legitimate users can access and manipulate the database. If you
have access to the database branch, we validate that your statement is
correct and only contains only allowed SQL keywords and functions.

### Request validation

For queries within the database branch, we go a step further by
validating your SQL statement. We forbid several functions like
`pg_sleep` or database administration commands, as we we run the
database instance for you. We take care of administrator tasks.

If your statement is correct, we run it in PostgreSQL and return the
response, including rows and errors. If your statement has syntax
errors or SQL errors, the error is returned to you. In case of
forbidden or unknown functions, Xata returns unknown function
error. All user errors get HTTP 400 (Bad request) responses with
the error message.

### SQL execution

Assuming your statement is accurate and aligned with the allowed
parameters, Xata proceeds to execute it within the PostgreSQL
instance. This means that if you've requested a `SELECT`, `INSERT`,
`UPDATE`, or `DELETE` operation and you might provided parameters.

When running your SQL statement, we use a dedicated PostgreSQL role
that only has access to the selected database branch objects be it
tables, constraints or indices.

### Response retrieval

We serialize the response from PostgreSQL into JSON. We return at most
1000 rows in a singe response. So please use pagination using `LIMIT`
and `OFFSET` keywords.

You can find more details about the SQL access in the documentation.

## Limitations

As you access your database directly using SQL, the Xata goodies will not
be accessible to you. For example the special `email` Xata type is not safe.
You can only add or edit special data types using the Xata API.

We support one statement per request.

Let us know what you think! If you have any suggestions, questions, or
issues reach out to us on [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) or follow
us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/xata).
