json-type.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Introducing the JSON column type'
description: 'Use the new JSON column type for improved data storage in Xata.'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/introducing-json-data-type/images/json-type/json-column.jpeg
  alt: JSON type header
author: Alejandro Martínez
date: 09-01-2023
published: true
slug: json-column-type
---

Schemafull data models are great. In Xata we are convinced that it is the best way to model your data in most cases,
but we also know that sometimes you need to store data that is not easily modeled in a relational way,
it's not as convenient as schemaless, or you just don't want to spend time on that at an early stage.
JSON documents as fields in a relational data store are a great way to have the best of both worlds.

Many of our users have been asking for this feature, and we are happy to announce that it's finally here.
Basic support for [JSON column type](https://xata.io/docs/sdk/filtering#json) has been added and it will bring many benefits:

- Enhanced flexibility: by providing a way to store schemaless data in a relational database
- Data integrity: JSON validation according to [RFC 7159](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7159.html)
- Streamlined development: store any unstructured data directly with no need to handle a schema or data conversions
- Efficient queries: apply many filters to nested nodes
- Search: JSON documents are indexed as any other Xata data type and can be searched using the [full-text search](https://xata.io/docs/sdk/search) capabilities of Xata

We plan on extending Xata support for JSON even further in the future, but the current capabilities are already very powerful and will solve most use cases.
Below we provide examples of how you can start using JSON documents in Xata today.

Let's think a bit about a simple data model for an online shop. Suppose we have a _Products_ table.

![Products table](/images/json-type/products.png)

## Creating a JSON column

Sometimes different categories of products have completely different specs, so we don't want to create a column for each of them.
We can use a JSON column to store the product details. Let's do this by adding a `details` field to our table. You can do this via the UI or via the API like this:

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/columns

{
  "name": "details",
  "type": "json"
}
```

Let's add a few products with different details, for instance:

- A t-shirt with size and color
- A book with author, ISBN and number of pages
- A climbing rope with a length and a thickness

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const record1 = await xata.db.Products.create({
  name: 'Xata xwag T-shirt',
  details: {
    color: 'purple',
    size: 'M',
  }
});
const record2 = await xata.db.Products.create({
  name: 'Meditations',
  details: {
    author: 'Marcus Aurelius',
    isbn: '978-0140449334',
    pages: 304
  }
});
const record3 = await xata.db.Products.create({
  name: 'Long climbing rope',
  details: {
    length: 80,
    thickness: 9.8,
    color: 'blue',
  }
});
```

```py
record1 = xata.records().insert("Products", {
  "name": "Xata xwag T-shirt",
  "details": {
    "color": "purple",
    "size": "M",
  }
})
record2 = xata.records().insert("Products", {
  "name": "Meditations",
  "details": {
    "author": "Marcus Aurelius",
    "isbn": "978-0140449334",
    "pages": 304
  }
})
record3 = xata.records().insert("Products", {
  "name": "Long climbing rope",
  "details": {
    "length": 80,
    "thickness": 9.8,
    "color": "blue"
  }
})
```

```jsonc
    // Not yet available
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/data
{
  "name": "Xata xwag T-shirt",
  "details": "{\"color\": \"purple\", \"size\": \"M\"}"
}

{
  "name": "Meditations",
  "details": "{\"author\": \"Marcus Aurelius\", \"isbn\": \"978-0140449334\", \"pages\": 304}"
}

{
  "name":"Long climbing rope",
  "details":"{\"length\": 80, \"thickness\": 9.8, \"color\": \"blue\"}"
}
```

</TabbedCode>

It's important to note that the JSON documents are processed and stored in a binary format in order to improve querying and storage performance.
This has the following implications:

- White spaces are not preserved
- Key order is not preserved
- In case of duplicate key, only the last one is stored

## Querying JSON documents

### Filter products size 'M'

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const records = await xata.db.Products.filter({
  "details->size": 'M'
}).getMany();
```

```python
records = xata.data().query("Products", {
  "filter": {
    "details->size": "M"
  }
})
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql

{
  "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"Products\" WHERE details->>'size' = 'M';"
}
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/query

{
  "filter": {
    "details->size": "M"
  }
}
```

</TabbedCode>

### Filter products with a length greater than 50 meters

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const records = await xata.db.Products.filter({
  "details->length": {
    "$gt": 50
  }
}).getMany();
```

```python
records = xata.data().query("Products", {
  "filter": {
    "details->length": {
      "$gt": 50
    }
  }
})
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql

{
  "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"Products\" WHERE (details->>length)::numeric > 50;"
}
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/query

{
  "filter": {
    "details->length": {
      "$gt": 50
    }
  }
}
```

</TabbedCode>

### Check for a substring in a nested JSON node

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const records = await xata.db.Products.filter({
  "details->length": {
    "$gt": 50
  }
}).getMany();
```

```python
records = xata.data().query("Products", {
  "filter": {
    "details->length": {
      "$gt": 50
    }
  }
})
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql
{
  "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"Products\" WHERE NOT (details->>length)::numeric > 50;"
}
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/query
{
  "filter": {
    "details->author": {
      "$contains": "Marcus"
    }
  }
}
```

</TabbedCode>
### Other general control or negation operators work as well

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const records = await xata.db.Products.filter({
  "details->length": {
    "$gt": 50
  }
}).getMany();
```

```python
records = xata.data().query("Products", {
  "filter": {
    "details->length": {
      "$gt": 50
    }
  }
})
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql
{
  "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"Products\" WHERE (details->>length)::numeric > 50;"
}
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/query
{
  "filter": {
    "$not": {
      "details->length": {
        "$gt": 50
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</TabbedCode>

## Conclusion

Xata is committed to simplifying the way you work with data. We will keep improving our offering by both adding more rich data types and extending the capabilities of the current ones.
Basic JSON support is one more step in that direction along with the previously released [Files](https://xata.io/blog/file-attachments).

If you have feedback or questions, you can reach out to us on [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) or [X / Twitter](https://twitter.com/xata).

Commit message:

Add short description of the arrow operatorˆ

json-type.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Introducing the JSON column type'
description: 'Use the new JSON column type for improved data storage in Xata.'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/introducing-json-data-type/images/json-type/json-column.jpeg
  alt: JSON type header
author: Alejandro Martínez
date: 09-01-2023
published: true
slug: json-column-type
---

Schemafull data models are great. In Xata we are convinced that it is the best way to model your data in most cases,
but we also know that sometimes you need to store data that is not easily modeled in a relational way,
it's not as convenient as schemaless, or you just don't want to spend time on that at an early stage.
JSON documents as fields in a relational data store are a great way to have the best of both worlds.

Many of our users have been asking for this feature, and we are happy to announce that it's finally here.
Basic support for [JSON column type](https://xata.io/docs/sdk/filtering#json) has been added and it will bring many benefits:

- Enhanced flexibility: by providing a way to store schemaless data in a relational database
- Data integrity: JSON validation according to [RFC 7159](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7159.html)
- Streamlined development: store any unstructured data directly with no need to handle a schema or data conversions
- Efficient queries: apply many filters to nested nodes
- Search: JSON documents are indexed as any other Xata data type and can be searched using the [full-text search](https://xata.io/docs/sdk/search) capabilities of Xata

We plan on extending Xata support for JSON even further in the future, but the current capabilities are already very powerful and will solve most use cases.
Below we provide examples of how you can start using JSON documents in Xata today.

Let's think a bit about a simple data model for an online shop. Suppose we have a _Products_ table.

![Products table](/images/json-type/products.png)

## Creating a JSON column

Sometimes different categories of products have completely different specs, so we don't want to create a column for each of them.
We can use a JSON column to store the product details. Let's do this by adding a `details` field to our table. You can do this via the UI or via the API like this:

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/columns

{
  "name": "details",
  "type": "json"
}
```

Let's add a few products with different details, for instance:

- A t-shirt with size and color
- A book with author, ISBN and number of pages
- A climbing rope with a length and a thickness

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const record1 = await xata.db.Products.create({
  name: 'Xata xwag T-shirt',
  details: {
    color: 'purple',
    size: 'M',
  }
});
const record2 = await xata.db.Products.create({
  name: 'Meditations',
  details: {
    author: 'Marcus Aurelius',
    isbn: '978-0140449334',
    pages: 304
  }
});
const record3 = await xata.db.Products.create({
  name: 'Long climbing rope',
  details: {
    length: 80,
    thickness: 9.8,
    color: 'blue',
  }
});
```

```py
record1 = xata.records().insert("Products", {
  "name": "Xata xwag T-shirt",
  "details": {
    "color": "purple",
    "size": "M",
  }
})
record2 = xata.records().insert("Products", {
  "name": "Meditations",
  "details": {
    "author": "Marcus Aurelius",
    "isbn": "978-0140449334",
    "pages": 304
  }
})
record3 = xata.records().insert("Products", {
  "name": "Long climbing rope",
  "details": {
    "length": 80,
    "thickness": 9.8,
    "color": "blue"
  }
})
```

```jsonc
    // Not yet available
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/data
{
  "name": "Xata xwag T-shirt",
  "details": "{\"color\": \"purple\", \"size\": \"M\"}"
}

{
  "name": "Meditations",
  "details": "{\"author\": \"Marcus Aurelius\", \"isbn\": \"978-0140449334\", \"pages\": 304}"
}

{
  "name":"Long climbing rope",
  "details":"{\"length\": 80, \"thickness\": 9.8, \"color\": \"blue\"}"
}
```

</TabbedCode>

It's important to note that the JSON documents are processed and stored in a binary format in order to improve querying and storage performance.
This has the following implications:

- White spaces are not preserved
- Key order is not preserved
- In case of duplicate key, only the last one is stored

## Querying JSON documents

### The arrow notation `->`

This is PostgreSQL's syntax for navigating JSON fields. It's used to access the value of any JSON node, no matter how deep in the tree.
Xata uses a similar notation to query data and apply some of the existing filters to any JSON value. PostgreSQL uses different operators and casting
depending on the data types, but Xata is able to infer the data type from the provided value and apply the correct operator.
So far, comparison by strings and numbers is supported but this will be extended in the near future.

### Filter products size 'M'

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const records = await xata.db.Products.filter({
  "details->size": 'M'
}).getMany();
```

```python
records = xata.data().query("Products", {
  "filter": {
    "details->size": "M"
  }
})
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql

{
  "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"Products\" WHERE details->>'size' = 'M';"
}
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/query

{
  "filter": {
    "details->size": "M"
  }
}
```

</TabbedCode>

### Filter products with a length greater than 50 meters

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const records = await xata.db.Products.filter({
  "details->length": {
    "$gt": 50
  }
}).getMany();
```

```python
records = xata.data().query("Products", {
  "filter": {
    "details->length": {
      "$gt": 50
    }
  }
})
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql

{
  "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"Products\" WHERE (details->>length)::numeric > 50;"
}
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/query

{
  "filter": {
    "details->length": {
      "$gt": 50
    }
  }
}
```

</TabbedCode>

### Check for a substring in a nested JSON node

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const records = await xata.db.Products.filter({
  "details->length": {
    "$gt": 50
  }
}).getMany();
```

```python
records = xata.data().query("Products", {
  "filter": {
    "details->length": {
      "$gt": 50
    }
  }
})
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql
{
  "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"Products\" WHERE NOT (details->>length)::numeric > 50;"
}
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/query
{
  "filter": {
    "details->author": {
      "$contains": "Marcus"
    }
  }
}
```

</TabbedCode>
### Other general control or negation operators work as well

<TabbedCode tabs={['TypeScript', 'Python', 'SQL', 'JSON']}>
```ts
const records = await xata.db.Products.filter({
  "details->length": {
    "$gt": 50
  }
}).getMany();
```

```python
records = xata.data().query("Products", {
  "filter": {
    "details->length": {
      "$gt": 50
    }
  }
})
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/sql
{
  "statement": "SELECT * FROM \"Products\" WHERE (details->>length)::numeric > 50;"
}
```

```jsonc
// POST https://{workspace}.{region}.xata.sh/db/{db}:{branch}/tables/{table}/query
{
  "filter": {
    "$not": {
      "details->length": {
        "$gt": 50
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</TabbedCode>

## Conclusion

Xata is committed to simplifying the way you work with data. We will keep improving our offering by both adding more rich data types and extending the capabilities of the current ones.
Basic JSON support is one more step in that direction along with the previously released [Files](https://xata.io/blog/file-attachments).

If you have feedback or questions, you can reach out to us on [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) or [X / Twitter](https://twitter.com/xata).
