keyword-vs-semantic-search-chatgpt.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Semantic or keyword search for finding ChatGPT context. Who searched it better?'
description: 'The blog post compares keyword search with semantic/vector search for the task of selecting context for an ChatGPT-based questions and answers bot.'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/how-to-fuzzy-search-with-xata.png
  alt: Keyword versus vector search
author: Tudor Golubenco
date: 03-06-2023
published: true
slug: keyword-vs-semantic-search-chatgpt
---

Last week we’ve added a Q\&A bot that answers questions from
[our documentation](https://xata.io/docs/overview?show-chat). This leverages
the ChatGPT tech to answer questions from the Xata documentation, even though
the OpenAI GPT model was never trained on the Xata docs.

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/xata-bot-preview.gif"
  width="786"
  height="475"
  alt="GIF of the Xata bot answering a question"
  caption="Xata chat bot answering a question"
  position="center"
/>

The way we do this is by using an approach suggested by Simon Willison
in this [blog post](https://simonwillison.net/2023/Jan/13/semantic-search-answers/).
The same approach can be found also in an
[OpenAI cookbook](https://github.com/openai/openai-cookbook/blob/main/examples/Question_answering_using_embeddings.ipynb).
The idea is the following:

- Run a text search against the documentation to find
  the content that is most relevant to the question asked by the user.
- Produce a prompt with this general form:

```txt
With these rules: {rules}
And this text: {context}
Given the above text, answer the question: {question}
Answer:
```

- Send the prompt to the ChatGPT API and let the model complete the answer.

We found out that this works quite well and, combined with a relatively
low model temperature (the concept of temperature is explained in this
[blog post](https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/02/what-is-chatgpt-doing-and-why-does-it-work/)),
this tends to produce correct results and code snippets, as long as the answer can
be found in the documentation.

A key limitation to this approach is that the prompt that you build in
the second step above needs to have max 4000 tokens (~3000 words). This
means that the first step, the text search to select the most relevant
documents, becomes really important. If the search step does a good
job and provides the right context, ChatGPT tends to also do a good
job in producing a correct and to-the-point result.

So what’s the best way to find the most relevant pieces of content in the
documentation? The OpenAI cookbook, as well as Simon’s blog, use what
is called semantic search. Semantic search leverages the language model
to generate embeddings for both the question and the content. Embeddings
are arrays of numbers that represent the text on a number of dimension.
Pieces of text that have similar embeddings have a similar meaning. This
means a good strategy is to find the pieces of content that the most
similar embeddings to the question embeddings.

Another possible strategy, based on the more classical keyword search,
looks like this:

- Ask ChatGPT to extract the keywords from the question, with a prompt
  like this:

```txt
Extract keywords for a search query from the text provided.
Add synonyms for words where a more common one exists.
```

- Use the provided keywords to run a free-text-search and pick the top results

Putting it in a single diagram, the two methods look like this:

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/xata-chatgpt-diagram.png"
  width="2735"
  height="1164"
  alt="Diagram showing how we use keyword or vector search with ChatGPT"
  caption="Keyword vs semantic search as context for ChatGPT"
  position="center"
/>

We have tried both on our documentation and have noticed some pros and cons.

Let’s start by comparing a few results. Both are ran against the same database,
and they both use the ChatGPT `gpt-3.5-turbo` model. As there is randomness involved,
I ran each question 2-3 times and picked what looked to me like the best result.

## Question: How do I install the Xata CLI?

**Answer with vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/install_question_vector.png"
  width="1531"
  height="1577"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How do I install the Xata CLI"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Answer with keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/install_question_keyword.png"
  width="1531"
  height="1450"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How do I install the Xata CLI"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

_Verdict_: Both versions provided the correct answer, however the vector
search one is a bit more complete. They both found the correct docs page
for it, but I think our highlights-based heuristic selected a shorter
chunk of text in case of the keyword strategy. Winner: vector search.

Score: 1-0

## Question: How do you use Xata with Deno?

**Answer with vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/deno_question_vector.png"
  width="1528"
  height="658"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How do you use Xata with Deno?"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Answer with keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/deno_question_keyword.png"
  width="1523"
  height="1453"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How do you use Xata with Deno?"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Verdict:** Disappointing result for vector search, who somehow missed the
dedicated Deno page in our docs. It did find some other Deno relevant content,
but not the page that contained the very useful example. Winner: keyword search.

Score: 1-1

## Question: How can I import a CSV file with custom column types?

**With vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/import_csv_question_vector.png"
  width="1518"
  height="723"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How can I import a CSV file with custom column types?"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**With keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/import_csv_question_keyword.png"
  width="1516"
  height="1052"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How can I import a CSV file with custom column types?"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Verdict:** Both have found the right page (”Import a CSV file”), but the
keyword search version managed to get a more complete answer. I did run this
multiple times to make sure it’s not a fluke. I think the difference comes
from how the text fragment is selected (neighbouring the keywords in case of
keyword search, from the beginning of the page in case of vector search). Winner: keyword search.

Score: 1-2

## Question: How can I filter a table named Users by the email column?

**With vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/filter_question_vector.png"
  width="1521"
  height="993"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How can I filter a table named Users by the email column?"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**With keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/filter_question_keyword.png"
  width="1518"
  height="1052"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How can I filter a table named Users by the email column?"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

_Verdict:_ The vector search did better on this one, because it found the
“Filtering” page on which there were more examples that ChatGPT could use
to compose the answer. The keyword search answer is subtly broken, because
it uses “query” instead of “filter” for the method name. Winner: vector search.

Score: 2-2

## Question: What is Xata?

**With vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/what_is_xata_vector.png"
  width="1523"
  height="1001"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: What is Xata?"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**With keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/what_is_xata_keyword.png"
  width="1524"
  height="1048"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: What is Xata?"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Verdict:** This one is a draw, because both answers are quite good. The two picked different pages to
summarize in an answer, but both did a good job and I can’t pick a winner.

Score: 3-3

## Configuration and tuning

This is a sample Xata request used for keyword search:

```jsonc
// POST https://workspace-id.eu-west-1.xata.sh/db/docs:main/tables/search/ask
{
  "question": "What is Xata?",
  "rules": [
    "Do not answer questions about pricing or the free tier. Respond that Xata has several options available, please check https://xata.io/pricing for more information.",
    "If the user asks a how-to question, provide a code snippet in the language they asked for with TypeScript as the default.",
    "Only answer questions that are relating to the defined context or are general technical questions. If asked about a question outside of the context, you can respond with \"It doesn't look like I have enough information to answer that. Check the documentation or contact support.\"",
    "Results should be relevant to the context provided and match what is expected for a cloud database.",
    "If the question doesn't appear to be answerable from the context provided, but seems to be a question about TypeScript, Javascript, or REST APIs, you may answer from outside of the provided context.",
    "If you answer with Markdown snippets, prefer the GitHub flavour.",
    "Your name is DanGPT"
  ],
  "searchType": "keyword",
  "search": {
    "fuzziness": 1,
    "target": [
      "slug",
      {
        "column": "title",
        "weight": 4
      },
      "content",
      "section",
      {
        "column": "keywords",
        "weight": 4
      }
    ],
    "boosters": [
      {
        "valueBooster": {
          "column": "section",
          "value": "guide",
          "factor": 18
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

And this what we use for vector search:

```jsonc
// POST https://workspace-id.eu-west-1.xata.sh/db/docs:main/tables/search/ask
{
  "question": "How do I get a record by id?",
  "rules": [
    "Do not answer questions about pricing or the free tier. Respond that Xata has several options available, please check https://xata.io/pricing for more information.",
    "If the user asks a how-to question, provide a code snippet in the language they asked for with TypeScript as the default.",
    "Only answer questions that are relating to the defined context or are general technical questions. If asked about a question outside of the context, you can respond with \"It doesn't look like I have enough information to answer that. Check the documentation or contact support.\"",
    "Results should be relevant to the context provided and match what is expected for a cloud database.",
    "If the question doesn't appear to be answerable from the context provided, but seems to be a question about TypeScript, Javascript, or REST APIs, you may answer from outside of the provided context.",
    "Your name is DanGPT"
  ],
  "searchType": "vector",
  "vectorSearch": {
    "column": "embeddings",
    "contentColumn": "content",
    "filter": {
      "section": "guide"
    }
  }
}
```

As you can see, the keyword search version has more settings, configuring fuzziness and boosters and column weights.
The vector search only uses a filter. I would call this a plus for keyword search: you have more dials to tune the search
and therefore get better answers. But it’s also more work, and the results from vector search are quite good without this tuning.

In our case, we already have tuned the keyword search for our, well, docs search functionality.
So it wasn’t necessarily extra work, and while playing with ChatGPT we discovered improvements
to our docs and search as well. Also, Xata just happens to have a very nice UI for tuning your
keyword search, so the work wasn’t hard to begin with (planning a separate blog post about that).

There is no reason for which vector search couldn’t also have boosters and column weights
and the like, but we don’t have it yet in Xata and I don’t know of any other solution that
makes that as easy as we make keyword search tuning. And, in general, there is more
prior art to keyword search, but it is quite possible that vector search will catch up.

For now, I’m going to call keyword search a winner on this one.

Score: 3-4

## Convenience

Our documentation already had a search function, dog-fooding Xata, so that was quite simple
to extend to a chat bot. Xata now also supports vector search natively, but using it required adding embeddings
for all the documentation pages and figuring out a good chunking strategy. We have used the OpenAI embeddings
API for producing the text embeddings, which had a minimal cost. Winner: Keyword search

Score 3-5

## Latency

The keyword search approach needs an extra round-trip to the ChatGPT API. This adds in terms of
latency to the result started to be streamed in the UI. By my measurements,
this adds around 1.8s extra time

**With vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/request_timing_vector.png"
  width="1228"
  height="300"
  alt="Xata bot request timing with vector search"
  caption="Request timing with vector search"
  position="center"
/>

**With keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/request_timing_keyword.png"
  width="1228"
  height="302"
  alt="Xata bot request timing with keyword search"
  caption="Request timing with keyword search"
  position="center"
/>

Note: The total and the content download times here are not relevant, because they mostly depend on how long the generated response is. Look at the “Waiting for server response” bar (the green one) to compare.

Winner: Vector search

Score: 4-5

## Cost

The keyword search version needs to do an extra API call to the ChatGPT API,
on the other hand, the vector search version needs to produce embeddings
for all the documents in the database plus the question. Unless we’re
talking about a lot of documents, I’m going to call this a tie.

Score: 5-6

## Conclusion

The score is tight! In our case we have gone with using the keyword search
for now, mostly because we have more ways of tuning it and as a result of
that it generates slightly better answers for our set of test questions.
Also, any improvements that we make to search automatically benefit both
the search and the chat use cases. As we’re improving our vector search
capabilities with more tuning options, we might switch to vector search,
or a hybrid approach, in the future.

If you’d like to set up a similar chat bot for your own documentation, or
any kind of knowledge base, you can easily implement the above using the
Xata ask endpoint. [Create an account](https://app.xata.io/signup) for
free and join us on [Discord](https://xata.io/discord). I’d be happy to
personally help you get it up and running!

Commit message:

Paragraph for introducing xata in blog posts (#115)

keyword-vs-semantic-search-chatgpt.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Semantic or keyword search for finding ChatGPT context. Who searched it better?'
description: 'The blog post compares keyword search with semantic/vector search for the task of selecting context for an ChatGPT-based questions and answers bot.'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/how-to-fuzzy-search-with-xata.png
  alt: Keyword versus vector search
author: Tudor Golubenco
date: 03-06-2023
published: true
slug: keyword-vs-semantic-search-chatgpt
---

> Hey there, you are on the Xata engineering blog. Xata is a serverless data platform on top of PostgreSQL, offering both keyword and semantic search based on Elasticsearch. [Sign up today](https://xata.io/)!

Last week we’ve added a Q\&A bot that answers questions from
[our documentation](https://xata.io/docs/overview?show-chat). This leverages
the ChatGPT tech to answer questions from the Xata documentation, even though
the OpenAI GPT model was never trained on the Xata docs.

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/xata-bot-preview.gif"
  width="786"
  height="475"
  alt="GIF of the Xata bot answering a question"
  caption="Xata chat bot answering a question"
  position="center"
/>

The way we do this is by using an approach suggested by Simon Willison
in this [blog post](https://simonwillison.net/2023/Jan/13/semantic-search-answers/).
The same approach can be found also in an
[OpenAI cookbook](https://github.com/openai/openai-cookbook/blob/main/examples/Question_answering_using_embeddings.ipynb).
The idea is the following:

- Run a text search against the documentation to find
  the content that is most relevant to the question asked by the user.
- Produce a prompt with this general form:

```txt
With these rules: {rules}
And this text: {context}
Given the above text, answer the question: {question}
Answer:
```

- Send the prompt to the ChatGPT API and let the model complete the answer.

We found out that this works quite well and, combined with a relatively
low model temperature (the concept of temperature is explained in this
[blog post](https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/02/what-is-chatgpt-doing-and-why-does-it-work/)),
this tends to produce correct results and code snippets, as long as the answer can
be found in the documentation.

A key limitation to this approach is that the prompt that you build in
the second step above needs to have max 4000 tokens (~3000 words). This
means that the first step, the text search to select the most relevant
documents, becomes really important. If the search step does a good
job and provides the right context, ChatGPT tends to also do a good
job in producing a correct and to-the-point result.

So what’s the best way to find the most relevant pieces of content in the
documentation? The OpenAI cookbook, as well as Simon’s blog, use what
is called semantic search. Semantic search leverages the language model
to generate embeddings for both the question and the content. Embeddings
are arrays of numbers that represent the text on a number of dimension.
Pieces of text that have similar embeddings have a similar meaning. This
means a good strategy is to find the pieces of content that the most
similar embeddings to the question embeddings.

Another possible strategy, based on the more classical keyword search,
looks like this:

- Ask ChatGPT to extract the keywords from the question, with a prompt
  like this:

```txt
Extract keywords for a search query from the text provided.
Add synonyms for words where a more common one exists.
```

- Use the provided keywords to run a free-text-search and pick the top results

Putting it in a single diagram, the two methods look like this:

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/xata-chatgpt-diagram.png"
  width="2735"
  height="1164"
  alt="Diagram showing how we use keyword or vector search with ChatGPT"
  caption="Keyword vs semantic search as context for ChatGPT"
  position="center"
/>

We have tried both on our documentation and have noticed some pros and cons.

Let’s start by comparing a few results. Both are ran against the same database,
and they both use the ChatGPT `gpt-3.5-turbo` model. As there is randomness involved,
I ran each question 2-3 times and picked what looked to me like the best result.

## Question: How do I install the Xata CLI?

**Answer with vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/install_question_vector.png"
  width="1531"
  height="1577"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How do I install the Xata CLI"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Answer with keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/install_question_keyword.png"
  width="1531"
  height="1450"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How do I install the Xata CLI"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

_Verdict_: Both versions provided the correct answer, however the vector
search one is a bit more complete. They both found the correct docs page
for it, but I think our highlights-based heuristic selected a shorter
chunk of text in case of the keyword strategy. Winner: vector search.

Score: 1-0

## Question: How do you use Xata with Deno?

**Answer with vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/deno_question_vector.png"
  width="1528"
  height="658"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How do you use Xata with Deno?"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Answer with keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/deno_question_keyword.png"
  width="1523"
  height="1453"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How do you use Xata with Deno?"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Verdict:** Disappointing result for vector search, who somehow missed the
dedicated Deno page in our docs. It did find some other Deno relevant content,
but not the page that contained the very useful example. Winner: keyword search.

Score: 1-1

## Question: How can I import a CSV file with custom column types?

**With vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/import_csv_question_vector.png"
  width="1518"
  height="723"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How can I import a CSV file with custom column types?"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**With keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/import_csv_question_keyword.png"
  width="1516"
  height="1052"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How can I import a CSV file with custom column types?"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Verdict:** Both have found the right page (”Import a CSV file”), but the
keyword search version managed to get a more complete answer. I did run this
multiple times to make sure it’s not a fluke. I think the difference comes
from how the text fragment is selected (neighbouring the keywords in case of
keyword search, from the beginning of the page in case of vector search). Winner: keyword search.

Score: 1-2

## Question: How can I filter a table named Users by the email column?

**With vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/filter_question_vector.png"
  width="1521"
  height="993"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How can I filter a table named Users by the email column?"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**With keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/filter_question_keyword.png"
  width="1518"
  height="1052"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: How can I filter a table named Users by the email column?"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

_Verdict:_ The vector search did better on this one, because it found the
“Filtering” page on which there were more examples that ChatGPT could use
to compose the answer. The keyword search answer is subtly broken, because
it uses “query” instead of “filter” for the method name. Winner: vector search.

Score: 2-2

## Question: What is Xata?

**With vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/what_is_xata_vector.png"
  width="1523"
  height="1001"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: What is Xata?"
  caption="Vector search response"
  position="center"
/>

**With keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/what_is_xata_keyword.png"
  width="1524"
  height="1048"
  alt="Question for the Xata bot: What is Xata?"
  caption="Keyword search response"
  position="center"
/>

**Verdict:** This one is a draw, because both answers are quite good. The two picked different pages to
summarize in an answer, but both did a good job and I can’t pick a winner.

Score: 3-3

## Configuration and tuning

This is a sample Xata request used for keyword search:

```jsonc
// POST https://workspace-id.eu-west-1.xata.sh/db/docs:main/tables/search/ask
{
  "question": "What is Xata?",
  "rules": [
    "Do not answer questions about pricing or the free tier. Respond that Xata has several options available, please check https://xata.io/pricing for more information.",
    "If the user asks a how-to question, provide a code snippet in the language they asked for with TypeScript as the default.",
    "Only answer questions that are relating to the defined context or are general technical questions. If asked about a question outside of the context, you can respond with \"It doesn't look like I have enough information to answer that. Check the documentation or contact support.\"",
    "Results should be relevant to the context provided and match what is expected for a cloud database.",
    "If the question doesn't appear to be answerable from the context provided, but seems to be a question about TypeScript, Javascript, or REST APIs, you may answer from outside of the provided context.",
    "If you answer with Markdown snippets, prefer the GitHub flavour.",
    "Your name is DanGPT"
  ],
  "searchType": "keyword",
  "search": {
    "fuzziness": 1,
    "target": [
      "slug",
      {
        "column": "title",
        "weight": 4
      },
      "content",
      "section",
      {
        "column": "keywords",
        "weight": 4
      }
    ],
    "boosters": [
      {
        "valueBooster": {
          "column": "section",
          "value": "guide",
          "factor": 18
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

And this what we use for vector search:

```jsonc
// POST https://workspace-id.eu-west-1.xata.sh/db/docs:main/tables/search/ask
{
  "question": "How do I get a record by id?",
  "rules": [
    "Do not answer questions about pricing or the free tier. Respond that Xata has several options available, please check https://xata.io/pricing for more information.",
    "If the user asks a how-to question, provide a code snippet in the language they asked for with TypeScript as the default.",
    "Only answer questions that are relating to the defined context or are general technical questions. If asked about a question outside of the context, you can respond with \"It doesn't look like I have enough information to answer that. Check the documentation or contact support.\"",
    "Results should be relevant to the context provided and match what is expected for a cloud database.",
    "If the question doesn't appear to be answerable from the context provided, but seems to be a question about TypeScript, Javascript, or REST APIs, you may answer from outside of the provided context.",
    "Your name is DanGPT"
  ],
  "searchType": "vector",
  "vectorSearch": {
    "column": "embeddings",
    "contentColumn": "content",
    "filter": {
      "section": "guide"
    }
  }
}
```

As you can see, the keyword search version has more settings, configuring fuzziness and boosters and column weights.
The vector search only uses a filter. I would call this a plus for keyword search: you have more dials to tune the search
and therefore get better answers. But it’s also more work, and the results from vector search are quite good without this tuning.

In our case, we already have tuned the keyword search for our, well, docs search functionality.
So it wasn’t necessarily extra work, and while playing with ChatGPT we discovered improvements
to our docs and search as well. Also, Xata just happens to have a very nice UI for tuning your
keyword search, so the work wasn’t hard to begin with (planning a separate blog post about that).

There is no reason for which vector search couldn’t also have boosters and column weights
and the like, but we don’t have it yet in Xata and I don’t know of any other solution that
makes that as easy as we make keyword search tuning. And, in general, there is more
prior art to keyword search, but it is quite possible that vector search will catch up.

For now, I’m going to call keyword search a winner on this one.

Score: 3-4

## Convenience

Our documentation already had a search function, dog-fooding Xata, so that was quite simple
to extend to a chat bot. Xata now also supports vector search natively, but using it required adding embeddings
for all the documentation pages and figuring out a good chunking strategy. We have used the OpenAI embeddings
API for producing the text embeddings, which had a minimal cost. Winner: Keyword search

Score 3-5

## Latency

The keyword search approach needs an extra round-trip to the ChatGPT API. This adds in terms of
latency to the result started to be streamed in the UI. By my measurements,
this adds around 1.8s extra time

**With vector search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/request_timing_vector.png"
  width="1228"
  height="300"
  alt="Xata bot request timing with vector search"
  caption="Request timing with vector search"
  position="center"
/>

**With keyword search:**

<ArticleImage
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/request_timing_keyword.png"
  width="1228"
  height="302"
  alt="Xata bot request timing with keyword search"
  caption="Request timing with keyword search"
  position="center"
/>

Note: The total and the content download times here are not relevant, because they mostly depend on how long the generated response is. Look at the “Waiting for server response” bar (the green one) to compare.

Winner: Vector search

Score: 4-5

## Cost

The keyword search version needs to do an extra API call to the ChatGPT API,
on the other hand, the vector search version needs to produce embeddings
for all the documents in the database plus the question. Unless we’re
talking about a lot of documents, I’m going to call this a tie.

Score: 5-6

## Conclusion

The score is tight! In our case we have gone with using the keyword search
for now, mostly because we have more ways of tuning it and as a result of
that it generates slightly better answers for our set of test questions.
Also, any improvements that we make to search automatically benefit both
the search and the chat use cases. As we’re improving our vector search
capabilities with more tuning options, we might switch to vector search,
or a hybrid approach, in the future.

If you’d like to set up a similar chat bot for your own documentation, or
any kind of knowledge base, you can easily implement the above using the
Xata ask endpoint. [Create an account](https://app.xata.io/signup) for
free and join us on [Discord](https://xata.io/discord). I’d be happy to
personally help you get it up and running!
