prague-postgres-meetup-oct-2024.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Prague PostgreSQL Meetup on October 29th'
description: 'The next Prague PostgreSQL Meetup will take place on October 29th!'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/prague-postgres-meetup/prague-postgres-meetup@2x.png
  alt: Prague PostgreSQL Meetup on October 29th
author: Gulcin Yildirim Jelinek
authorEmail: gulcin@xata.io
date: 10-28-2024
tags:
  [
    'postgres',
    'postgresql',
    'prague-postgres-meetup',
    'prague',
    'praha',
    'meetup',
    'event',
    'community',
    'october',
    'pgconfeu'
  ]
published: true
slug: prague-postgres-meetup-october-2024
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/prague-postgres-meetup/prague-postgres-meetup-og@2x.png
---

## Prague PostgreSQL Meetup on October 29th

[Last week](https://xata.io/blog/pgconfeu-2024), I joined almost 800 other PostgreSQL enthusiasts at [PGConf.EU 2024](https://2024.pgconf.eu/) in Athens, Greece.
Post-conference blues are real, but being back in Prague, I’m already looking forward to the Prague PostgreSQL Meetup on Tuesday, October 29th!

![Andrew, Gulcin, and Rudy at PGConf.EU 2024](/images/prague-postgres-meetup/andrew-gulcin-rudy.png)

[Prague PostgreSQL Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/prague-postgresql-meetup/) is an active community of PostgreSQL enthusiasts in Prague, Czech Republic.
I am happy to be the main organizer and greatly appreciate all the speakers, attendees, and sponsors who have made this meetup possible every month since 2018!

![Prague PostgreSQL Meetup October](/images/prague-postgres-meetup/meetup-oct.png)

I'm thrilled to invite you to our next meetup taking place on Tuesday, October 29th, at 18:00.
We usually hold each meetup on the last Monday of the month at a venue that kindly hosts us, but since this Monday is a public holiday in the Czech Republic, we've moved the meetup to Tuesday, October 29th.
This month, [Pure Storage](https://www.purestorage.com/) is hosting us at their office in Karlin, and we’re grateful to our friends at Pure Storage for their support!

If you are in the area, please join us! 🇨🇿 💙 🐘

### Meet our speakers

We have an exciting lineup of speakers for this event:

- **Ondrej Hlavac** is a member of the Technical Staff in the Digital Transformation Group organization at Pure Storage. Ondrej is a skilled software engineer with a strong database system and data integration background. Previously, Ondrej worked on developing automated data lineage solutions through static code analysis, contributing to metadata extractors and analyzers for SQL-based systems like SAP Hana and Apache Hive, with contributions to PostgreSQL as well. Currently, Ondrej focuses on Master Data Management (MDM) integrations, bringing expertise in managing and optimizing data ecosystems across multiple platforms.

- **Josef Machytka** works as a Professional Service Consultant - PostgreSQL specialist in NetApp Deutschland GmbH, Open-Source Services division. He has 30+ years of experience with different databases - PostgreSQL (12y), BigQuery (7y), Oracle (15y), MySQL (12y), Elasticsearch (5y), MS SQL (5y), Sybase, and FoxPro. He also has 10+ years of experience with high-speed and volume data ingestion pipelines, data analysis, data warehouses, and related topics.

### Agenda

Our meetup takes usually 2 hours, and we start at 18:00 with an opening talk and each speaker has 45 minutes for their talk.
The meetup ends with a closing talk and some networking.

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>18:00 | Opening talk by Tomas Vondra</b>
</Alert>

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>18:15 | ORM and Lambdas use with Postgres by Ondrej Hlavac</b>
</Alert>

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>19:00 | PostgreSQL and DuckDB: Analytics Performance and Use Cases Compared by Josef Machytka</b>
</Alert>

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>20:00 | Closing, end of event</b>
</Alert>

### Session highlights

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>ORM and Lambdas use with Postgres | Ondrej Hlavac</b>
  <Box as="span" color="titleAccent">
    In this talk, Ondrej will explore how they integrate AWS Lambda functions with PostgreSQL on RDS, leveraging ORM
    techniques in their Python API services. He will cover how they manage Lambda connections to the database using
    connection pooling with AWS RDS Proxy and how they store logs and metrics in Postgres for system monitoring and
    performance optimization.
  </Box>
</Alert>

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>PostgreSQL and DuckDB: Analytics Performance and Use Cases Compared | Josef Machytka</b>
  <Box as="span" color="titleAccent">
    The talk will explore the capabilities and features of PostgreSQL and DuckDB in the context of data analytics. It
    will highlight key differences, focusing on the strengths and weaknesses of each database for analytical workloads.
    The presentation will also include benchmark results from some typical business use cases, providing real-world
    performance comparisons. Additionally, we'll discuss how to combine PostgreSQL and DuckDB effectively in data
    analytics pipelines to leverage the best of both worlds.
  </Box>
</Alert>

## Prague PostgreSQL Developer Day 2025

We also announced [P2D2 (Prague PostgreSQL Developer Day)](https://p2d2.cz/) 2025 last week in Athens!  
The 17th P2D2 will be held on January 28-29, 2025, at ČVUT FIT, Thákurova 9, Prague.

The conference spans two days:

- January 28. 2025 (Tuesday) - workshops/trainings, i.e. half-day or whole-day sessions for smaller groups of attendees
- January 29, 2025 (Wednesday) - regular conference with 45-minute talks

📣 The calls for [talks and trainings](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1jm13YksXYUiM3dlwGjHPWMQwVGro4tQxrFYVoOP9PK8/viewform?edit_requested=true) and [sponsors](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1Uq-lsYP3nj4w9KQGFyguOtZDSr8HYT26rbiMl47PjdY/viewform?edit_requested=true) are now open.
Talk and training proposals are accepted until November 23, 2024 (Sunday, end of day). In case of questions, let us know at info@p2d2.cz

## Conclusion

Hope to see everyone in and around Prague joining us on the 29th of October for the meetup!
If you aren't a member yet, feel free to register here: [Prague PostgreSQL Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/prague-postgresql-meetup)

We also announced Prague PostgreSQL Developer Day 2025. If you are interested in sponsoring, or submitting a talk or training, please check out the [P2D2 website](https://p2d2.cz/) or send us an email at info@p2d2.cz.

Commit message:

Resize image and add LinkedIn event

prague-postgres-meetup-oct-2024.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Prague PostgreSQL Meetup on October 29th'
description: 'The next Prague PostgreSQL Meetup will take place on October 29th!'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/prague-postgres-meetup/prague-postgres-meetup@2x.png
  alt: Prague PostgreSQL Meetup on October 29th
author: Gulcin Yildirim Jelinek
authorEmail: gulcin@xata.io
date: 10-28-2024
tags:
  [
    'postgres',
    'postgresql',
    'prague-postgres-meetup',
    'prague',
    'praha',
    'meetup',
    'event',
    'community',
    'october',
    'pgconfeu'
  ]
published: true
slug: prague-postgres-meetup-october-2024
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/prague-postgres-meetup/prague-postgres-meetup-og@2x.png
---

## Prague PostgreSQL Meetup on October 29th

[Last week](https://xata.io/blog/pgconfeu-2024), I joined almost 800 other PostgreSQL enthusiasts at [PGConf.EU 2024](https://2024.pgconf.eu/) in Athens, Greece.
Post-conference blues are real, but being back in Prague, I’m already looking forward to the Prague PostgreSQL Meetup on Tuesday, October 29th!

![Andrew, Gulcin, and Rudy at PGConf.EU 2024](/images/prague-postgres-meetup/andrew-gulcin-rudy.png)

[Prague PostgreSQL Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/prague-postgresql-meetup/) is an active community of PostgreSQL enthusiasts in Prague, Czech Republic.
I am happy to be the main organizer and greatly appreciate all the speakers, attendees, and sponsors who have made this meetup possible every month since 2018!

![Prague PostgreSQL Meetup October](/images/prague-postgres-meetup/meetup-oct.png)

I'm thrilled to invite you to our next meetup taking place on Tuesday, October 29th, at 18:00.
We usually hold each meetup on the last Monday of the month at a venue that kindly hosts us, but since this Monday is a public holiday in the Czech Republic, we've moved the meetup to Tuesday, October 29th.
This month, [Pure Storage](https://www.purestorage.com/) is hosting us at their office in Karlin, and we’re grateful to our friends at Pure Storage for their support!

If you are in the area, please join us! 🇨🇿 💙 🐘

### Meet our speakers

We have an exciting lineup of speakers for this event:

- **Ondrej Hlavac** is a member of the Technical Staff in the Digital Transformation Group organization at Pure Storage. Ondrej is a skilled software engineer with a strong database system and data integration background. Previously, Ondrej worked on developing automated data lineage solutions through static code analysis, contributing to metadata extractors and analyzers for SQL-based systems like SAP Hana and Apache Hive, with contributions to PostgreSQL as well. Currently, Ondrej focuses on Master Data Management (MDM) integrations, bringing expertise in managing and optimizing data ecosystems across multiple platforms.

- **Josef Machytka** works as a Professional Service Consultant - PostgreSQL specialist in NetApp Deutschland GmbH, Open-Source Services division. He has 30+ years of experience with different databases - PostgreSQL (12y), BigQuery (7y), Oracle (15y), MySQL (12y), Elasticsearch (5y), MS SQL (5y), Sybase, and FoxPro. He also has 10+ years of experience with high-speed and volume data ingestion pipelines, data analysis, data warehouses, and related topics.

### Agenda

Our meetup takes usually 2 hours, and we start at 18:00 with an opening talk and each speaker has 45 minutes for their talk.
The meetup ends with a closing talk and some networking.

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>18:00 | Opening talk by Tomas Vondra</b>
</Alert>

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>18:15 | ORM and Lambdas use with Postgres by Ondrej Hlavac</b>
</Alert>

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>19:00 | PostgreSQL and DuckDB: Analytics Performance and Use Cases Compared by Josef Machytka</b>
</Alert>

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>20:00 | Closing, end of event</b>
</Alert>

### Session highlights

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>ORM and Lambdas use with Postgres | Ondrej Hlavac</b>
  <Box as="span" color="titleAccent">
    In this talk, Ondrej will explore how they integrate AWS Lambda functions with PostgreSQL on RDS, leveraging ORM
    techniques in their Python API services. He will cover how they manage Lambda connections to the database using
    connection pooling with AWS RDS Proxy and how they store logs and metrics in Postgres for system monitoring and
    performance optimization.
  </Box>
</Alert>

<Alert flexDirection="column" alignItems="flex-start" gap="1">
  <b>PostgreSQL and DuckDB: Analytics Performance and Use Cases Compared | Josef Machytka</b>
  <Box as="span" color="titleAccent">
    The talk will explore the capabilities and features of PostgreSQL and DuckDB in the context of data analytics. It
    will highlight key differences, focusing on the strengths and weaknesses of each database for analytical workloads.
    The presentation will also include benchmark results from some typical business use cases, providing real-world
    performance comparisons. Additionally, we'll discuss how to combine PostgreSQL and DuckDB effectively in data
    analytics pipelines to leverage the best of both worlds.
  </Box>
</Alert>

## Prague PostgreSQL Developer Day 2025

We also announced [P2D2 (Prague PostgreSQL Developer Day)](https://p2d2.cz/) 2025 last week in Athens!  
The 17th P2D2 will be held on January 28-29, 2025, at ČVUT FIT, Thákurova 9, Prague.

The conference spans two days:

- January 28. 2025 (Tuesday) - workshops/trainings, i.e. half-day or whole-day sessions for smaller groups of attendees
- January 29, 2025 (Wednesday) - regular conference with 45-minute talks

📣 The calls for [talks and trainings](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1jm13YksXYUiM3dlwGjHPWMQwVGro4tQxrFYVoOP9PK8/viewform?edit_requested=true) and [sponsors](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1Uq-lsYP3nj4w9KQGFyguOtZDSr8HYT26rbiMl47PjdY/viewform?edit_requested=true) are now open.
Talk and training proposals are accepted until November 23, 2024 (Sunday, end of day). In case of questions, let us know at info@p2d2.cz

## Conclusion

I hope to see everyone in and around Prague joining us on October 29th for the meetup!
If you aren't a member yet, feel free to register via our meetup page: [Prague PostgreSQL Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/prague-postgresql-meetup)
If you are on LinkedIn, we also post our meetup announcements there: [Prague PostgreSQL Meetup LinkedIn Event](https://www.linkedin.com/events/7251534755974770688/about/)

We also announced Prague PostgreSQL Developer Day 2025. If you are interested in sponsoring, or submitting a talk or training, please check out the [P2D2 website](https://p2d2.cz/) or send us an email at info@p2d2.cz.
