recap-oss-vienna.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Recap of OSS Vienna: What is Happening in the Open Source World'
description: 'My notes from the Open Source Summit Europe in Vienna, featuring fresh updates from open source communities, insights from the Xata booth, and highlights from our Postgres Happy Hour'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/oss-vienna/oss-vienna-recap@2x.png
  alt: "Recap of OSS Vienna: What's Happening in the Open Source World"
author: Gulcin Yildirim Jelinek
authorEmail: gulcin@xata.io
date: 10-03-2024
tags:
  [
    'postgres',
    'oss',
    'vienna',
    'happy-hour',
    'xata',
    'postgresql',
    'postgres-happy-hour',
    'ossummit',
    'booth',
    'linuxfoundation',
    'europe',
    'extensions'
  ]
published: true
slug: oss-vienna-recap
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/oss-vienna/oss-vienna-recap-og@2x.png
---

## Recap of OSS Vienna: What's Happening in the Open Source World 📝

We were at the Open Source Summit Europe in Vienna from September 16-18.
We had our booth, spoke with hundreds of people and received really positive feedback on our open-source tools.
We also hosted a [Postgres Happy Hour](https://xata.io/blog/oss-vienna-happy-hour) and the discussions were so enjoyable thay we even ended up having dinner with some attendees who stayed until the end of our two-hour event!

This was my first time at Open Source Summit and I am already looking forward to the [next one](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/open-source-summit-europe/) taking place in Amsterdam, Netherlands from August 25-27, 2025.

## Day 0

I must say the weather in Prague (my departure city), especially in the south of the Czech Republic, resembled what I imagine biblical floods would look like.
Travelling to Vienna (my destination) was not fun, to say the least. I was fortunate that my flight was not canceled and I managed to arrive on the same day as planned, unlike many others who had planned to use trains and could not even make it to their own talks.

I intended to get my badge and set up our booth on Sunday but trip to Vienna was enough as it was, so we will jump directly to Day 1 😊
However, I met my colleague Simona for the first time, and we managed to have dinner together with her my friend Yasar.

![Yasar, Simona and me after our dinner](/images/recap-oss-vienna/yasar-simona-gulcin.png)

## Day 1

I arrived at the venue very early, struggling with my umbrella I borrowed from the hotel while carrying a luggage full of swag and a box with helium tank inside 😅
Luckily, I met two of the kindest people at the hotel breakfast and they helped me carry everything. Big thanks to Susan Remmert (from The Linux Foundation) and Jonas Remmert (from Phytec) for making it so much easier to settle into the conference!

### The Zephyr Project

If you are interested in [The Zephyr Project](https://zephyrproject.org/), go follow Susan! She hosted a workshop at the summit.

Quoting from the #ZephyrRTOS [Github page](https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/tree/main):

> The Zephyr Project is a scalable real-time operating system (RTOS) supporting multiple hardware architectures, optimized for resource constrained devices, and built with security in mind.
> The Zephyr OS is based on a small-footprint kernel designed for use on resource-constrained systems: from simple embedded environmental sensors and LED wearables to sophisticated smart watches and IoT wireless gateways.
> The Zephyr kernel supports multiple architectures, including ARM (Cortex-A, Cortex-R, Cortex-M), Intel x86, ARC, Nios II, Tensilica Xtensa, and RISC-V, SPARC, MIPS, and a large number of supported boards.

You can join community [Discord](https://discord.com/invite/Ck7jw53nU2) if you are interested.

### Xata Booth

Then, Noémi and Simona arrived. After getting our badges, we headed to the sponsor area to set up our booth.
I also met Noémi for the first time, but the three of us hit it off immediately! Our booth quickly became the happiest one, with the sit-com level background laughter for the next three days 😂

![Booth photo: Noémi, Gulcin and Simona, happily smiling](/images/recap-oss-vienna/booth-noemi-gulcin-simona.png)

### Linus Torvalds' Keynote

The highlight of the first day was the opening keynote where [Linus Torvalds and Dirk Hohndel had a discussion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OM_8UOPFpqE&list=PLbzoR-pLrL6pwSxJqsghZ1XVNb7pngzJv&index=18).

The discussion began by marking 33 years of Linux — what an achievement! The Linux kernel 6.11 had just been released on September 15, the day before this keynote. Dirk asked, "What's interesting, what should people know about this release?" Linus replied that for the past 15 years, they've had a regular cadence of releases, roughly every 9 weeks.
He added, "Releases are not exciting, they are not supposed to be. They are timely and hopefully very reliable, but exciting is not the goal."
He explained that for him, the excitement comes after a release, as they start working on new code for the next version. That's what he considers fun.

I think this insight applies to the PostgreSQL project as well. PostgreSQL releases, like Linux, are not meant to be exciting — though they are to me! — but they need to be consistent and reliable.
PostgreSQL 17 was released on September 26, and Laurenz Albe touches on this "shiny vs. stable releases" dilemma in his recent [blog post](https://www.cybertec-postgresql.com/en/whats-so-great-about-postgresql-v17/).
He asks, "Why are there no spectacular new features in PostgreSQL v17?" Considering that [Laurenz](https://postgresql.life/post/laurenz_albe/) is a major contributor and has been involved in the project for a long time, I found his perspective also quite valuable.

Dirk mentioned, overall, looking at the trends over years, Linux kernel releases are mostly about drivers, file systems, some hardware support and asked where the most of code comes from these days.
To that, Linus replied it's always been mostly drivers, and probably more than half of the kernel code is driver support and that's literally the point of a kernel, and that most people should not care unless they are kernel developers.
He gave an example stating there are like 12 CPU architectures but thousands of drivers, so every new release, the bulk of the changes are just new hardware support for drivers and fixes for old hardware support for drivers.
Linus also mentioned that he checks the statistics of the changes after every release and finds it surprising - despite working on Linux for a third of a century - that core kernel development is still largely about fairly low-level virtual file system code and a lot of the ongoing discussions are still about memory management and things that have been around forever.

The conversation eventually turned to the Real-Time Linux project, which has finally been officially integrated into the kernel after - a very brief - 20 years of development!
Linus commented, "People think kernel development is fast because there are releases every three months, with 10,000 to 15,000 commits per release. But a lot of it has been for the stuff that is ready, it may have been developed over months, years or in some cases even decades."
He explained that Real-Time Linux took so long because the real-time patches touched every area of the kernel, requiring consensus from all developers and significant updates to drivers and a lot more work in general.

When the topic of the Rust vs. C debate came up, along with the fact that some maintainers had left because of it, and the discussions had become almost religious, Linus shared his perspective.
He said that C is easy, Rust is not, and it’s natural for people who have developed in C for decades to resist something new.

Regarding the fierce arguments, he added:

> ["I enjoy arguments. One of the nice parts of Rust that it has liven up discussions in kernel. C is very simple and Rust is not."](https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835598926050730269)

Other insightful quotes from the discussion were captured by Arun Gupta in a great thread:

> ["Absolutely no one understands everything in the kernel. I don't. People specialize in different areas - and I think that is one of our strengths."](https://x.com/linuxfoundation/status/1835599725191438529?s=46&t=oLSbUb4p0O_6BtJKfhCVCg)

> ["Kernel maintainers are aging, been there for over three decades, it’s a good sign, is also tough for new developers to see yourself as part of that group"](https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835601594278195531)

> [“You need people in the community that have been around for a while, not necessarily 3 decades, it’s about having that trust”](https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835602726257938740)

> [“Do what you love, if what you love is not meaningful to others, then it will not create the impact”](https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835603893763375165)

### Developer Relations Foundation

Devrel foundation have tweeted

[https://x.com/linuxfoundation/status/1835590347365163237?s=46\&t=oLSbUb4p0O_6BtJKfhCVCg](https://x.com/linuxfoundation/status/1835590347365163237?s=46&t=oLSbUb4p0O_6BtJKfhCVCg)

[https://www.linuxfoundation.org/press/linux-foundation-announces-intent-to-form-developer-relations-foundation](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/press/linux-foundation-announces-intent-to-form-developer-relations-foundation)

[https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/linux-foundation-announces-intent-to-form-developer-relations-foundation-302248446.html](https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/linux-foundation-announces-intent-to-form-developer-relations-foundation-302248446.html)

### Opensearch Joins The Linux foundation

Opensearch joins linux foundation

### Postgres at Microsoft Presentation at Microsoft Booth

Binnur / postgres at microsoft

### Valkey Glide Demo at AWS Booth

Listened valkey glide demo by Dal

Photo from booth
Photo of girl with our balloon
Cutest booth people says
// insert her photo with the balloon

When your open source turns to the dark side / https://horovits.medium.com/when-your-open-source-turns-to-the-dark-side-331d83f182
Leaf cloud / minus carbon footprint

### OSS Pledge by Sentry

Oss pledge // find the brochure
Security guys from meta / ask Noemi

### Postgres Happy Hour Poster

Inviting people to party / use Elizabet’s designed poster

### Open Source Maturity Report in Europe

Open source maturity report in Europe / https://www.linuxfoundation.org/research/world-of-open-source-eu-2024
Part of this keynote: https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835578339731407310?s=46\&t=oLSbUb4p0O\_6BtJKfhCVCg
https://x.com/tweetfromhilary/status/1835579600820220266?s=46\&t=oLSbUb4p0O\_6BtJKfhCVCg

### Hiring board

Hiring board photo and posters

// insert our hiring posters
// insert our open roles urls

## Day 2

### Extension Ecosystem Summit

On the second day my friend [Alastair Turner](https://www.linkedin.com/in/decodableminion/) visited me at the Xata booth. While I was showcasing our open source projects via the cutest stickers of each of them he noticed [pgzx](https://github.com/xataio/pgzx) which is our open source framework for creating Postgres extensions in Zig language.
He mentioned that our common friend [Floor Drees](https://www.linkedin.com/in/floordrees/) is organizing an event on the Day 0 of [PGConf.EU](https://2024.pgconf.eu/) dedicated for Postgres extensions and he will be giving a talk about [pg_tde](https://github.com/Percona-Lab/pg_tde) there.
And he suggested pgzx would fit perfectly for the extensions discussion as it allows developers to build Postgres extensions. I took his advice and contacted Floor, and I will give giving a talk about pgzx at the [Extensions Ecosystem Summit](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/extension-ecosystem-summit-tickets-1022518730047).

// insert pgzx logo

If you are heading Athens for PGConf.EU this year, join us at Extensions Ecosystem Summit sponsored by Tembo, Percona, Xata and Timescale.

![Extensions Ecosystem Summit](/images/recap-oss-vienna/extensions-summit.png)

And right after the summit, we are hosting our Xata Postgres Dinner, join us via registering [this form](https://5i8caik7lja.typeform.com/).

![Join us for a Postgres Dinner in Athens](/images/recap-oss-vienna/athens-dinner.png)

## Day 3

### CNCP Meeting

### Postgres Happy Hour

// insert party photos

## Conclusion

You can watch all the recording at [Linux Foundation's Youtube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@LinuxfoundationOrg), there is a playlist named [OSS EU 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIinl7r-FJI&list=PLbzoR-pLrL6rC7SpO7MJCZm22Qp5ns3p-&pp=iAQB) set for this event.
Keynotes are listed as part of a dedicated playlist named [Keynotes @ OSS EU 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xdFMKMcESLI&list=PLbzoR-pLrL6pwSxJqsghZ1XVNb7pngzJv&pp=iAQB).

I truly enjoyed being part of OSS Europe and looking forward to attending next one. If you're also planning to attend [next year's](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/open-source-summit-europe/) #OSSummit let me know!

Commit message:

Add DevRel Foundation and OpenSearch announcements

recap-oss-vienna.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Recap of OSS Vienna: What is Happening in the Open Source World'
description: 'My notes from the Open Source Summit Europe in Vienna, featuring fresh updates from open source communities, insights from the Xata booth, and highlights from our Postgres Happy Hour'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/oss-vienna/oss-vienna-recap@2x.png
  alt: "Recap of OSS Vienna: What's Happening in the Open Source World"
author: Gulcin Yildirim Jelinek
authorEmail: gulcin@xata.io
date: 10-03-2024
tags:
  [
    'postgres',
    'oss',
    'vienna',
    'happy-hour',
    'xata',
    'postgresql',
    'postgres-happy-hour',
    'ossummit',
    'booth',
    'linuxfoundation',
    'europe',
    'extensions'
  ]
published: true
slug: oss-vienna-recap
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/oss-vienna/oss-vienna-recap-og@2x.png
---

## Recap of OSS Vienna: What's Happening in the Open Source World 📝

We were at the Open Source Summit Europe in Vienna from September 16-18.
We had our booth, spoke with hundreds of people and received really positive feedback on our open-source tools.
We also hosted a [Postgres Happy Hour](https://xata.io/blog/oss-vienna-happy-hour) and the discussions were so enjoyable thay we even ended up having dinner with some attendees who stayed until the end of our two-hour event!

This was my first time at Open Source Summit and I am already looking forward to the [next one](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/open-source-summit-europe/) taking place in Amsterdam, Netherlands from August 25-27, 2025.

## Day 0

I must say the weather in Prague (my departure city), especially in the south of the Czech Republic, resembled what I imagine biblical floods would look like.
Travelling to Vienna (my destination) was not fun, to say the least. I was fortunate that my flight was not canceled and I managed to arrive on the same day as planned, unlike many others who had planned to use trains and could not even make it to their own talks.

I intended to get my badge and set up our booth on Sunday but trip to Vienna was enough as it was, so we will jump directly to Day 1 😊
However, I met my colleague Simona for the first time, and we managed to have dinner together with her my friend Yasar.

![Yasar, Simona and me after our dinner](/images/recap-oss-vienna/yasar-simona-gulcin.png)

## Day 1

I arrived at the venue very early, struggling with my umbrella I borrowed from the hotel while carrying a luggage full of swag and a box with helium tank inside 😅
Luckily, I met two of the kindest people at the hotel breakfast and they helped me carry everything. Big thanks to Susan Remmert (from The Linux Foundation) and Jonas Remmert (from Phytec) for making it so much easier to settle into the conference!

### The Zephyr Project

If you are interested in [The Zephyr Project](https://zephyrproject.org/), go follow Susan!

Quoting from the #ZephyrRTOS [Github page](https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/tree/main):

> The Zephyr Project is a scalable real-time operating system (RTOS) supporting multiple hardware architectures, optimized for resource constrained devices, and built with security in mind.
> The Zephyr OS is based on a small-footprint kernel designed for use on resource-constrained systems: from simple embedded environmental sensors and LED wearables to sophisticated smart watches and IoT wireless gateways.
> The Zephyr kernel supports multiple architectures, including ARM (Cortex-A, Cortex-R, Cortex-M), Intel x86, ARC, Nios II, Tensilica Xtensa, and RISC-V, SPARC, MIPS, and a large number of supported boards.

You can join community [Discord](https://discord.com/invite/Ck7jw53nU2) if you are interested.

### Xata Booth

Then, Noémi and Simona arrived. After getting our badges, we headed to the sponsor area to set up our booth.
I also met Noémi for the first time, but the three of us hit it off immediately! Our booth quickly became the happiest one, with the sit-com level background laughter for the next three days 😂

![Booth photo: Noémi, Gulcin and Simona, happily smiling](/images/recap-oss-vienna/booth-noemi-gulcin-simona.png)

### Linus Torvalds' Keynote

The highlight of the first day was the opening keynote where [Linus Torvalds and Dirk Hohndel had a discussion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OM_8UOPFpqE&list=PLbzoR-pLrL6pwSxJqsghZ1XVNb7pngzJv&index=18).

The discussion began by marking 33 years of Linux — what an achievement! The Linux kernel 6.11 had just been released on September 15, the day before this keynote. Dirk asked, "What's interesting, what should people know about this release?" Linus replied that for the past 15 years, they've had a regular cadence of releases, roughly every 9 weeks.
He added, "Releases are not exciting, they are not supposed to be. They are timely and hopefully very reliable, but exciting is not the goal."
He explained that for him, the excitement comes after a release, as they start working on new code for the next version. That's what he considers fun.

I think this insight applies to the PostgreSQL project as well. PostgreSQL releases, like Linux, are not meant to be exciting — though they are to me! — but they need to be consistent and reliable.
PostgreSQL 17 was released on September 26, and Laurenz Albe touches on this "shiny vs. stable releases" dilemma in his recent [blog post](https://www.cybertec-postgresql.com/en/whats-so-great-about-postgresql-v17/).
He asks, "Why are there no spectacular new features in PostgreSQL v17?" Considering that [Laurenz](https://postgresql.life/post/laurenz_albe/) is a major contributor and has been involved in the project for a long time, I found his perspective also quite valuable.

Dirk mentioned, overall, looking at the trends over years, Linux kernel releases are mostly about drivers, file systems, some hardware support and asked where the most of code comes from these days.
To that, Linus replied it's always been mostly drivers, and probably more than half of the kernel code is driver support and that's literally the point of a kernel, and that most people should not care unless they are kernel developers.
He gave an example stating there are like 12 CPU architectures but thousands of drivers, so every new release, the bulk of the changes are just new hardware support for drivers and fixes for old hardware support for drivers.
Linus also mentioned that he checks the statistics of the changes after every release and finds it surprising - despite working on Linux for a third of a century - that core kernel development is still largely about fairly low-level virtual file system code and a lot of the ongoing discussions are still about memory management and things that have been around forever.

The conversation eventually turned to the Real-Time Linux project, which has finally been officially integrated into the kernel after - a very brief - 20 years of development!
Linus commented, "People think kernel development is fast because there are releases every three months, with 10,000 to 15,000 commits per release. But a lot of it has been for the stuff that is ready, it may have been developed over months, years or in some cases even decades."
He explained that Real-Time Linux took so long because the real-time patches touched every area of the kernel, requiring consensus from all developers and significant updates to drivers and a lot more work in general.

When the topic of the Rust vs. C debate came up, along with the fact that some maintainers had left because of it, and the discussions had become almost religious, Linus shared his perspective.
He said that C is easy, Rust is not, and it’s natural for people who have developed in C for decades to resist something new.

Regarding the fierce arguments, he added:

> ["I enjoy arguments. One of the nice parts of Rust that it has liven up discussions in kernel. C is very simple and Rust is not."](https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835598926050730269)

Other insightful quotes from the discussion were captured by Arun Gupta in a great thread:

> ["Absolutely no one understands everything in the kernel. I don't. People specialize in different areas - and I think that is one of our strengths."](https://x.com/linuxfoundation/status/1835599725191438529?s=46&t=oLSbUb4p0O_6BtJKfhCVCg)

> ["Kernel maintainers are aging, been there for over three decades, it’s a good sign, is also tough for new developers to see yourself as part of that group"](https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835601594278195531)

> [“You need people in the community that have been around for a while, not necessarily 3 decades, it’s about having that trust”](https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835602726257938740)

> [“Do what you love, if what you love is not meaningful to others, then it will not create the impact”](https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835603893763375165)

### Developer Relations Foundation

📣 [The Linux Foundation made an exciting announcement about forming the Developer Relations Foundation.](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/press/linux-foundation-announces-intent-to-form-developer-relations-foundation)

> VIENNA – September 16, 2024 – The Linux Foundation, the nonprofit organization enabling mass innovation through open source, today announced its intent to form the Developer Relations Foundation (DRF).
> The DRF is a new community-driven project under the Linux Foundation, with the mission to elevate the professional practice of developer relations (DevRel) and increase awareness of its role as a crucial driver of developer success, technology adoption, and business value.
>
> Understanding the need for a unified foundation, the formation of the DRF stems from a shared passion for DevRel and the recognition that the profession faces persistent challenges, such as a lack of role clarity and difficulty in measuring impact.
> Despite significant growth in resources and organizations addressing these issues, efforts and resources are fragmented. As a project under the Linux Foundation, the DRF will work with industry leaders to address these challenges and drive real and measurable impact.

If this interests you, be sure to visit [DRF website](https://lists.dev-rel.org/g/community/wiki) and take [the survey](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSd1_z1JP7VTOAt6FQBcG7iwHSXFX6JbgRnVtk7WuVBBAMXHmg/viewform).
Also, check out [DevRel Foundation Github page](https://github.com/DevRel-Foundation).

### OpenSearch Joins The Linux foundation

📣 [The Linux Foundation announced the launch of the OpenSearch Software Foundation](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/press/linux-foundation-announces-opensearch-software-foundation-to-foster-open-collaboration-in-search-and-analytics).

> AWS transfers OpenSearch to the Linux Foundation to support a vendor-neutral community for search, analytics, observability, and vector database software.
>
> VIENNA – September 16, 2024 – Today, the Linux Foundation, the nonprofit organization enabling mass innovation through open source, announced the launch of the OpenSearch Software Foundation, a community-driven initiative that will support OpenSearch and its search software, which is used by developers around the world to build search, analytics, observability, and vector database applications.
> Hosted by the Linux Foundation, the OpenSearch Software Foundation will work with community maintainers and developers, as well as founding member organizations, to support the continued growth of OpenSearch.
>
> Established in 2021 and previously hosted by Amazon Web Services (AWS), OpenSearch has recorded more than 700 million software downloads and participation from thousands of contributors and more than 200 project maintainers.
> With the launch of the OpenSearch Software Foundation, AWS has transitioned OpenSearch under the Linux Foundation.
> The OpenSearch Software Foundation will focus on supporting OpenSearch as it continues to be adopted by organizations around the world to power business-critical workloads.
> As a part of the Linux Foundation family of open source projects, OpenSearch and its community will benefit from deep resources for programming and infrastructure, such as training and professional certification initiatives, product documentation, developer collaboration and release support, and local and global events programs.

AWS transferring OpenSearch to the Linux Foundation is huge, and I am all for it! Open Source Summit made me really optimistic about the state of open source, even amid the ongoing license wars.

We are big fans of OpenSearch here at Xata, and our CTO, [Tudor Golubenco](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tudorgolubenco/), participated in the OpenSearch Community Meeting on September 3rd.
He gave a talk explaining replication from PostgreSQL to OpenSearch using [pgstream](https://xata.io/pgstream), our open source change data capture tool.

If you're interested, you can watch the meetup recording on OpenSearch's YouTube channel [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MVOFChxTpRc).

### Postgres at Microsoft Presentation at Microsoft Booth

Binnur / postgres at microsoft

### Valkey Glide Demo at AWS Booth

Listened valkey glide demo by Dal

Photo from booth
Photo of girl with our balloon
Cutest booth people says
// insert her photo with the balloon

When your open source turns to the dark side / https://horovits.medium.com/when-your-open-source-turns-to-the-dark-side-331d83f182
Leaf cloud / minus carbon footprint

### OSS Pledge by Sentry

Oss pledge // find the brochure
Security guys from meta / ask Noemi

### Postgres Happy Hour Poster

Inviting people to party / use Elizabet’s designed poster

### Open Source Maturity Report in Europe

Open source maturity report in Europe / https://www.linuxfoundation.org/research/world-of-open-source-eu-2024
Part of this keynote: https://x.com/arungupta/status/1835578339731407310?s=46\&t=oLSbUb4p0O\_6BtJKfhCVCg
https://x.com/tweetfromhilary/status/1835579600820220266?s=46\&t=oLSbUb4p0O\_6BtJKfhCVCg

### Hiring board

Hiring board photo and posters

// insert our hiring posters
// insert our open roles urls

## Day 2

### Extension Ecosystem Summit

On the second day my friend [Alastair Turner](https://www.linkedin.com/in/decodableminion/) visited me at the Xata booth. While I was showcasing our open source projects via the cutest stickers of each of them he noticed [pgzx](https://github.com/xataio/pgzx) which is our open source framework for creating Postgres extensions in Zig language.
He mentioned that our common friend [Floor Drees](https://www.linkedin.com/in/floordrees/) is organizing an event on the Day 0 of [PGConf.EU](https://2024.pgconf.eu/) dedicated for Postgres extensions and he will be giving a talk about [pg_tde](https://github.com/Percona-Lab/pg_tde) there.
And he suggested pgzx would fit perfectly for the extensions discussion as it allows developers to build Postgres extensions. I took his advice and contacted Floor, and I will give giving a talk about pgzx at the [Extensions Ecosystem Summit](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/extension-ecosystem-summit-tickets-1022518730047).

// insert pgzx logo

If you are heading Athens for PGConf.EU this year, join us at Extensions Ecosystem Summit sponsored by Tembo, Percona, Xata and Timescale.

![Extensions Ecosystem Summit](/images/recap-oss-vienna/extensions-summit.png)

And right after the summit, we are hosting our Xata Postgres Dinner, join us via registering [this form](https://5i8caik7lja.typeform.com/).

![Join us for a Postgres Dinner in Athens](/images/recap-oss-vienna/athens-dinner.png)

## Day 3

### CNCP Meeting

### Postgres Happy Hour

// insert party photos

## Conclusion

You can watch all the recording at [Linux Foundation's Youtube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@LinuxfoundationOrg), there is a playlist named [OSS EU 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIinl7r-FJI&list=PLbzoR-pLrL6rC7SpO7MJCZm22Qp5ns3p-&pp=iAQB) set for this event.
Keynotes are listed as part of a dedicated playlist named [Keynotes @ OSS EU 2024](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xdFMKMcESLI&list=PLbzoR-pLrL6pwSxJqsghZ1XVNb7pngzJv&pp=iAQB).

I truly enjoyed being part of OSS Europe and looking forward to attending next one. If you're also planning to attend [next year's](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/open-source-summit-europe/) #OSSummit let me know!
