whats-new-in-pgroll-0-10-0.mdx, before:

---
title: pgroll 0.10.0 update
description: pgroll v0.10 includes one breaking change, new subcommand to convert SQL statements into pgroll operations and improvments to adding default values to existing tables
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgroll-update-0-6-0@2x.jpg
  alt: pgroll
author: Andrew Farries, Noémi Ványi
authorEmail: noemi@xata.io
date: 28-02-2025
tags:
  [
    'open-source',
    'postgres',
    'schema',
    'migrations',
    'pgroll',
    'fpSchemaMigrations',
    'oss',
    'django',
    'prisma',
    'sqlalchemy',
    'drizzle'
  ]
published: false
slug: pgroll-0-10-0-update
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgroll-update-0-6-0@2x.jpg
canonicalUrl: https://pgroll.com/blog/pgroll-0100-update
---

We've just released `v0.10` of `pgroll`, our open-source schema migration tool for Postgres. As we've done for previous releases, we'll take a look at some of the headline features that made it into the release and look ahead to what's coming next. Past entries in the release blog series can be read here:

- [pgroll v0.9 release blog](https://pgroll.com/blog/pgroll-090-update)
- [pgroll v0.8 release blog](https://pgroll.com/blog/pgroll-080-update)
- [pgroll v0.7 release blog](https://pgroll.com/blog/pgroll-070-update)

For the complete notes for this release see the [Github v0.10.0 release page](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll/releases/tag/v0.10.0).

## What is pgroll?

[pgroll](https://pgroll.com/) is a schema migration tool for Postgres. Designed for application developers working on applications that require frequent schema changes but also need to maintain zero downtime around those schema changes, `pgroll` takes a different approach compared to most other migration tools on the market. There are two aspects that characterize `pgroll`'s approach to migrations:

- **Multi-version migrations**: Making a schema change with `pgroll` results in two versions of the schema; the one before the change and the one after the change - this allows applications to select which version of the schema they want to work with and allows side-by-side rollout of applications that require the new schema changes with old applications that may be incompatible with it.
- **Lock-safe migrations**: Migrations using `pgroll` are expressed declaratively, rather than using SQL directly. This allows `pgroll` to implement the steps required to perform the schema change in a safe manner, ensuring that any locks required on the affected objects are held for the shortest possible time.

Full documentation for pgroll is in the [documentation section](https://pgroll.com/docs/latest/getting-started) of this site.

`pgroll` `v0.10` includes a new subcommand, several improvements and one breaking change. Let's take a look at what went into the `v0.10` release in more detail:

## Convert SQL migration files to pgroll migrations

We added a new subcommand called `convert`. Now `pgroll` can translate SQL migration files generated by ORMs into pgroll migrations. It can read SQL statements from `stdin` or from the specified file. It has one flag `--name` to configure the name of the migration. If the flag is unset, the name is set to the current timestamp.

```sh
$ pgroll convert --help
Convert SQL statements to a pgroll migration. The command can read SQL statements from stdin or a file

Usage:
  pgroll convert <path to file with migrations> [flags]
Flags:
  -h, --help          help for convert
  -n, --name string   Name of the migration (default "{current_timestamp}")
```

### Examples

You can use `pgroll` with any ORM that can generate raw SQL statements for its migrations. Let's look at a few example ORMs.

#### Alembic

Alembic is a database migration tool used in SQLAlchemy projects. You can generate SQL statements from its migrations in its offline mode. If you add
`--sql` flag to `upgrade` command of `alembic` it prints the SQL statements to stdout. You can pipe this output into `pgroll convert`:

```sh
$ alembic update {revision} --sql | pgroll convert --name {revision}
{
  "name": "{revision}",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_table": {
        "name": "employees",
        "colunms:" [
          {
            "name": "name",
            "type": "varchar(100)"
          },
          {
            "name": "joined",
            "type": "timestamp with time zone"
          },
          {
            "name": "email",
            "type": "varchar(254)"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Django

Django is the go-to tool for Python web development. It can connect to several databases, including PostgreSQL. If your web application uses PostgreSQL storage, you can leverage the `convert` subcommand.

After your defined your migration in Python, you can use `manage.py` to extract the SQL migration file from Django. The subcommand `sqlmigrate` prints
the SQL statements to stdout.

Create a new model for an `Employee` with a following simplified model:

```python
class Employee():
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
    joined = models.DateTimeField()
    email = models.EmailField()
```

Then run `sqlmigrate` to generate the SQL statements and pipe the output into `pgroll convert`:

```sh
manage.py sqlmigrate my_app 0000 | pgroll convert -name 0000_init
{
  "name": "0000_init",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_table": {
        "name": "employees",
        "colunms:" [
          {
            "name": "name",
            "type": "varchar(100)"
          },
          {
            "name": "joined",
            "type": "timestamp with time zone"
          },
          {
            "name": "email",
            "type": "varchar(254)"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Drizzle

Drizzle is an ORM for Typescript projects.

You can translate your Drizzle migrations with the schema below:

```

```

Then run `pgroll convert` to get the approprate pgroll migrations.

```sh
drizzle-kit generate --dialect postgresql --schema=./src/schema.ts --name=init
pgroll convert 0000_init.sql --name 0000_init
{
  "name": "0000_init",
  "operations": [
      "create_table": {
        "name": "employees",
        "colunms:" [
          {
            "name": "name",
            "type": "varchar(100)"
          },
          {
            "name": "joined",
            "type": "timestamp with time zone"
          },
          {
            "name": "email",
            "type": "varchar(254)"
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Limitations

We are releasing this feature so we can get your feedback early. The functionality still has some limitations. The generated pgroll migrations must be edited to provide `up` and `down` data migrations manually.

Furthermore, the SQL statements are not aggregated into single pgroll operations. Some ORMs add unique constraints in a different statement when they are creating a table with a unique column. This leads to more pgroll operations than necessary. You can resolve this manually by removing the unique constraint operation from the pgroll migration, and add it to the list of `constraints` of `create_table`.

```json
{
  "create_table": {
    "name": "employees",
    "columns": [
      {
        "name": "email",
        "varchar(254)"
      }
    ]
  }
},
{
  "create_constraint": {
    "name": "my_unique_email",
    "type": "unique",
    "columns": ["email"]
    "up": {
      "email": "TODO"
    }
  }
}

```

can be simplified to

```json
{
  "create_table": {
    "name": "employees",
    "columns": [
      {
        "name": "email",
        "varchar(254)"
      }
    ],
    "constraints": [
      {
        "name": "my_unique_email",
        "type": "unique",
        "columns": ["email"]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Also, the same applies to some cases when the ORM does the backfilling for new columns. For example, when you add a new column with a default value, an ORM produces these SQL statements:

```sql
ALTER TABLE "adults" ADD COLUMN "age" smallint DEFAULT 18 NULL CHECK ("age" >= 18);
ALTER TABLE "adults" ALTER COLUMN "level" DROP DEFAULT;

UPDATE adults SET age = 18;

ALTER TABLE adults ALTER COLUMN age SET NOT NULL;

UPDATE "adults" SET "age" = 18 WHERE "age" IS NULL;
SET CONSTRAINTS ALL IMMEDIATE;

ALTER TABLE "adults" ALTER COLUMN "age" SET NOT NULL;
```

Resulting in the following pgroll migration using the `convert` subcommand:

```json
{
  "add_column": {
    "column": {
      "check": {
        "constraint": "age >= 18",
        "name": "age_check"
      },
      "default": "18",
      "name": "age",
      "nullable": true,
      "type": "smallint"
    },
    "table": "adults",
    "up": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration"
  }
},
{
  "alter_column": {
    "column": "age",
    "default": null,
    "table": "adults",
    "down": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration",
    "up": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration"
  }
},
{
  "sql": {
    "up": "update adults set age = 18"
  }
},
{
  "alter_column": {
    "column": "age",
    "nullable": false,
    "table": "adults",
    "up": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration"
    "down": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration",
  }
},
{
  "sql": {
    "up": "UPDATE \"adults\" SET \"age\" = 18 WHERE \"age\" IS NULL"
  }
},
{
  "sql": {
    "up": "SET CONSTRAINTS ALL IMMEDIATE"
  }
},
{
  "alter_column": {
    "column": "age",
    "nullable": false,
    "table": "adults",
    "up": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration"
    "down": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration",
  }
}
```

This can be written as a single pgroll migration:

```json
{
  "add_column": {
    "column": {
      "check": {
        "constraint": "age \u003e= 0",
        "name": "age_check"
      },
      "default": "18",
      "name": "age",
      "nullable": true,
      "type": "smallint"
    },
    "table": "adults",
    "up": "18"
  }
},
```

Also, SQL migration files usually start with `BEGIN` and `COMMIT` because the ORM runs the DDLs in a single transaction. These staments show up in the list of operations in the generated migrations. These operations are safe to be deleted from the list.

## Breaking change to create_index operations

`pgroll` `v0.10` includes one breaking change to how columns are configured when creating new indexes. Previously, the `columns` list of `create_index` operations expected a list of strings:

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": ["salary"]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Now you need to specify columns as map values:

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": {
          "salary": {}
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Pgroll is now using maps so `create_index` can support several new options to configure the index elements per column.

### Sort order

Using `sort` attribute you can change the sort order from the default ascending to descending.

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": [
           "salary": {
             "sort": "desc"
           }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Collation

The attribute `collation` changes the collation used for the index.

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": [
           "bio": {
             "collate": "fr_FR"
           }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Operator class

Now you can also change the operator class for the indexed column. Also, you can pass configuration paramaters for the operator class.

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": [
           "bio": {
             "nulls": "first"
             "opclass": {
               "name": "opc_name",
               "params": {
                 "param1": "val1"
               }
             }
           }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Ordering of NULL values

Another option to change sort ordering of the index is `nulls`. You can specify if the null values come before (`first`) or after (`last`) non-null values.

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": [
           "position": {
             "nulls": "last"
           }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

## Adding columns with default values

`pgroll` `v0.10` makes improvements to how columns with `DEFAULT` values are added to existing tables to avoid long-lived `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` locks when adding columns with [volatile](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/xfunc-volatility.html) `DEFAULT` values.

In Postgres, adding a new column with a `DEFAULT` value is an operation that comes with a pitfall: Postgres has different behaviour depending on the volatility of the `DEFAULT`. Consider this `ALTER TABLE` statement:

```sql
ALTER TABLE items ADD COLUMN value INTEGER DEFAULT 100;
```

The `DEFAULT` expression here is non-volatile, meaning that Postgres can apply [an optimization](https://brandur.org/postgres-default) when adding the column - rather than rewriting the table to populate every row with the new `DEFAULT`, Postgres applies the `DEFAULT` lazily. The entry in the system catalog `pg_attribute` for the new column is updated to record that there is a default value for the column that should be populated on-the-fly whenever the column is read.

By contrast, consider this `ALTER TABLE` operation:

```sql
ALTER TABLE items ADD COLUMN value INTEGER DEFAULT (random()*100)::integer;
```

This time, the `DEFAULT` expression is volatile, meaning that Postgres cannot apply the same optimization as before. Instead, Postgres must rewrite the table to populate the new field with its `DEFAULT` in every row. The table rewrite requires an `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` lock for the duration of the rewrite.

Previously, `pgroll` did not differentiate between these two cases when adding a new column with a `DEFAULT` value, meaning that adding a new column with a volatile `DEFAULT` would take an `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` lock, locking out reads and writes from the affected table for the duration of the table rewrite.

Starting with `pgroll` `v0.10`, `pgroll` now detects whether the `DEFAULT` value for a new column is volatile or non-volatile, and applies the `DEFAULT` differently in each case:

- For non-volatile `DEFAULT` values, `pgroll` applies the `DEFAULT` to the new column directly as before. The operation is a catalog-only update and requires only a very brief `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` lock.
- For a volatile `DEFAULT`, `pgroll` creates the column without a `DEFAULT`, avoiding the table rewrite. The new column is then backfilled with the `DEFAULT` value using `pgroll`'s backfill mechanism. The `DEFAULT` is added to the column on migration completion.

A migration to add a new column with a volatile `DEFAULT` is written:

```json
{
  "name": "29_add_column_with_default",
  "operations": [
    {
      "add_column": {
        "table": "items",
        "up": "(random()*100)::integer",
        "column": {
          "name": "value",
          "type": "integer",
          "default": "(random()*100)::integer"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

The `up` expression used as the backfill must be the same as the `default` expression for the new column. `pgroll` will backfill the new column with the new `DEFAULT` value, and then apply the `DEFAULT` to the column on completion of the migration.

This means that adding columns with volatile `DEFAULT` values no longer requires a potentially long-lived `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` lock, making such operations safe to perform on tables with large row counts.

## Conclusion

`pgroll` is open-source; check out [the repository](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll) to get involved.

Many of the features that have gone into this and previous releases have been directly influenced by how users tell us they are using the tool and where it's currently lacking. We welcome any feedback in [issues](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll/issues), or contributions via [pull requests](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll/pulls)!

Commit message:

small improvements to ORM examples

whats-new-in-pgroll-0-10-0.mdx, after:

---
title: pgroll 0.10.0 update
description: pgroll v0.10 includes one breaking change, new subcommand to convert SQL statements into pgroll operations and improvments to adding default values to existing tables
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgroll-update-0-6-0@2x.jpg
  alt: pgroll
author: Andrew Farries, Noémi Ványi
authorEmail: noemi@xata.io
date: 28-02-2025
tags:
  [
    'open-source',
    'postgres',
    'schema',
    'migrations',
    'pgroll',
    'fpSchemaMigrations',
    'oss',
    'django',
    'prisma',
    'sqlalchemy',
    'drizzle'
  ]
published: false
slug: pgroll-0-10-0-update
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgroll-update-0-6-0@2x.jpg
canonicalUrl: https://pgroll.com/blog/pgroll-0100-update
---

We've just released `v0.10` of `pgroll`, our open-source schema migration tool for Postgres. As we've done for previous releases, we'll take a look at some of the headline features that made it into the release and look ahead to what's coming next. Past entries in the release blog series can be read here:

- [pgroll v0.9 release blog](https://pgroll.com/blog/pgroll-090-update)
- [pgroll v0.8 release blog](https://pgroll.com/blog/pgroll-080-update)
- [pgroll v0.7 release blog](https://pgroll.com/blog/pgroll-070-update)

For the complete notes for this release see the [Github v0.10.0 release page](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll/releases/tag/v0.10.0).

## What is pgroll?

[pgroll](https://pgroll.com/) is a schema migration tool for Postgres. Designed for application developers working on applications that require frequent schema changes but also need to maintain zero downtime around those schema changes, `pgroll` takes a different approach compared to most other migration tools on the market. There are two aspects that characterize `pgroll`'s approach to migrations:

- **Multi-version migrations**: Making a schema change with `pgroll` results in two versions of the schema; the one before the change and the one after the change - this allows applications to select which version of the schema they want to work with and allows side-by-side rollout of applications that require the new schema changes with old applications that may be incompatible with it.
- **Lock-safe migrations**: Migrations using `pgroll` are expressed declaratively, rather than using SQL directly. This allows `pgroll` to implement the steps required to perform the schema change in a safe manner, ensuring that any locks required on the affected objects are held for the shortest possible time.

Full documentation for pgroll is in the [documentation section](https://pgroll.com/docs/latest/getting-started) of this site.

`pgroll` `v0.10` includes a new subcommand, several improvements and one breaking change. Let's take a look at what went into the `v0.10` release in more detail:

## Convert SQL migration files to pgroll migrations

We added a new subcommand called `convert`. Now `pgroll` can translate SQL migration files generated by ORMs into pgroll migrations. It can read SQL statements from `stdin` or from a specified file. It has one flag `--name` to configure the name of the migration. If the flag is unset, the name is set to the current timestamp.

```sh
$ pgroll convert --help
Convert SQL statements to a pgroll migration. The command can read SQL statements from stdin or a file

Usage:
  pgroll convert <path to file with migrations> [flags]
Flags:
  -h, --help          help for convert
  -n, --name string   Name of the migration (default "{current_timestamp}")
```

### Examples

You can use `pgroll` with any ORM that can generate raw SQL statements for its migrations. Let's look at a few examples.

#### Alembic

[Alembic](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/) is a database migration tool used in SQLAlchemy projects. You can generate SQL statements from its migrations in [its offline mode](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/offline.html). If you add
`--sql` flag to `upgrade` command of `alembic` it prints the SQL statements to stdout. You can pipe this output into `pgroll convert`:

```sh
$ alembic update {revision} --sql | pgroll convert --name {revision}
{
  "name": "{revision}",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_table": {
        "name": "employees",
        "colunms:" [
          {
            "name": "name",
            "type": "varchar(100)"
          },
          {
            "name": "joined",
            "type": "timestamp with time zone"
          },
          {
            "name": "email",
            "type": "varchar(254)"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Django

Django is the go-to tool for Python web development. It can connect to several databases, including PostgreSQL. If your web application uses PostgreSQL storage, you can leverage the `convert` subcommand.

After your defined your migration in Python, you can use `manage.py` to extract the SQL migration file from Django. The [subcommand `sqlmigrate`](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/ref/django-admin/#django-admin-sqlmigrate) prints
the SQL statements to stdout.

Create a new model for an `Employee` with a following simplified model:

```python
class Employee():
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
    joined = models.DateTimeField()
    email = models.EmailField()
```

Then run `sqlmigrate` to generate the SQL statements and pipe the output into `pgroll convert`:

```sh
manage.py sqlmigrate my_app 0000 | pgroll convert -name 0000_init
{
  "name": "0000_init",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_table": {
        "name": "employees",
        "colunms:" [
          {
            "name": "name",
            "type": "varchar(100)"
          },
          {
            "name": "joined",
            "type": "timestamp with time zone"
          },
          {
            "name": "email",
            "type": "varchar(254)"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Drizzle

Drizzle is a popular ORM for Typescript projects. You can extract SQL statements using its [`generate` command](https://orm.drizzle.team/docs/drizzle-kit-generate).

The following examples schema in Drizzle can be translated using `pgroll`:

```ts
import { pgTable, timestamp, varchar } from "drizzle-orm/pg-core";

export const employees = pgTable('employees', {
  name: varchar({ length: 100 }),
  joined: timestamp({ withTimezone: true }),
  email: varchar({ length: 254 })
});
```

Run `pgroll convert` to get the approprate pgroll migrations.

```sh
drizzle-kit generate --dialect postgresql --schema=./src/schema.ts --name=init
pgroll convert 0000_init.sql --name 0000_init
{
  "name": "0000_init",
  "operations": [
      "create_table": {
        "name": "employees",
        "colunms:" [
          {
            "name": "name",
            "type": "varchar(100)"
          },
          {
            "name": "joined",
            "type": "timestamp with time zone"
          },
          {
            "name": "email",
            "type": "varchar(254)"
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Limitations

We are releasing this feature so we can get your feedback early. The functionality still has some limitations. The generated pgroll migrations must be edited to provide `up` and `down` data migrations manually.

Furthermore, the SQL statements are not aggregated into single pgroll operations. Some ORMs add unique constraints in a different statement when they are creating a table with a unique column. This leads to more pgroll operations than necessary. You can resolve this manually by removing the unique constraint operation from the pgroll migration, and add it to the list of `constraints` of `create_table`.

```json
{
  "create_table": {
    "name": "employees",
    "columns": [
      {
        "name": "email",
        "varchar(254)"
      }
    ]
  }
},
{
  "create_constraint": {
    "name": "my_unique_email",
    "type": "unique",
    "columns": ["email"]
    "up": {
      "email": "TODO"
    }
  }
}

```

can be simplified to

```json
{
  "create_table": {
    "name": "employees",
    "columns": [
      {
        "name": "email",
        "varchar(254)"
      }
    ],
    "constraints": [
      {
        "name": "my_unique_email",
        "type": "unique",
        "columns": ["email"]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Also, the same applies to some cases when the ORM does the backfilling for new columns. For example, when you add a new column with a default value, an ORM produces these SQL statements:

```sql
ALTER TABLE "adults" ADD COLUMN "age" smallint DEFAULT 18 NULL CHECK ("age" >= 18);
ALTER TABLE "adults" ALTER COLUMN "level" DROP DEFAULT;

UPDATE adults SET age = 18;

ALTER TABLE adults ALTER COLUMN age SET NOT NULL;

UPDATE "adults" SET "age" = 18 WHERE "age" IS NULL;
SET CONSTRAINTS ALL IMMEDIATE;

ALTER TABLE "adults" ALTER COLUMN "age" SET NOT NULL;
```

Resulting in the following pgroll migration using the `convert` subcommand:

```json
{
  "add_column": {
    "column": {
      "check": {
        "constraint": "age >= 18",
        "name": "age_check"
      },
      "default": "18",
      "name": "age",
      "nullable": true,
      "type": "smallint"
    },
    "table": "adults",
    "up": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration"
  }
},
{
  "alter_column": {
    "column": "age",
    "default": null,
    "table": "adults",
    "down": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration",
    "up": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration"
  }
},
{
  "sql": {
    "up": "update adults set age = 18"
  }
},
{
  "alter_column": {
    "column": "age",
    "nullable": false,
    "table": "adults",
    "up": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration"
    "down": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration",
  }
},
{
  "sql": {
    "up": "UPDATE \"adults\" SET \"age\" = 18 WHERE \"age\" IS NULL"
  }
},
{
  "sql": {
    "up": "SET CONSTRAINTS ALL IMMEDIATE"
  }
},
{
  "alter_column": {
    "column": "age",
    "nullable": false,
    "table": "adults",
    "up": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration"
    "down": "TODO: Implement SQL data migration",
  }
}
```

This can be written as a single pgroll migration:

```json
{
  "add_column": {
    "column": {
      "check": {
        "constraint": "age \u003e= 0",
        "name": "age_check"
      },
      "default": "18",
      "name": "age",
      "nullable": true,
      "type": "smallint"
    },
    "table": "adults",
    "up": "18"
  }
},
```

Also, SQL migration files usually start with `BEGIN` and `COMMIT` because the ORM runs the DDLs in a single transaction. These staments show up in the list of operations in the generated migrations. These operations are safe to be deleted from the list.

## Breaking change to create_index operations

`pgroll` `v0.10` includes one breaking change to how columns are configured when creating new indexes. Previously, the `columns` list of `create_index` operations expected a list of strings:

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": ["salary"]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Now you need to specify columns as map values:

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": {
          "salary": {}
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

`pgroll` is now using maps so `create_index` can support several new options to configure the index elements per column.

### Sort order

Using `sort` attribute you can change the sort order from the default ascending to descending.

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": [
           "salary": {
             "sort": "desc"
           }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Collation

The attribute `collation` changes the collation used for the index.

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": [
           "bio": {
             "collate": "fr_FR"
           }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Operator class

Now you can also change the operator class for the indexed column. Also, you can pass configuration paramaters for the operator class.

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": [
           "bio": {
             "nulls": "first"
             "opclass": {
               "name": "opc_name",
               "params": {
                 "param1": "val1"
               }
             }
           }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Ordering of NULL values

Another option to change sort ordering of the index is `nulls`. You can specify if the null values come before (`first`) or after (`last`) non-null values.

```json
{
  "name": "10_create_index",
  "operations": [
    {
      "create_index": {
        "table": "employees",
        "columns": [
           "position": {
             "nulls": "last"
           }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

## Adding columns with default values

`pgroll` `v0.10` makes improvements to how columns with `DEFAULT` values are added to existing tables to avoid long-lived `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` locks when adding columns with [volatile](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/xfunc-volatility.html) `DEFAULT` values.

In Postgres, adding a new column with a `DEFAULT` value is an operation that comes with a pitfall: Postgres has different behaviour depending on the volatility of the `DEFAULT`. Consider this `ALTER TABLE` statement:

```sql
ALTER TABLE items ADD COLUMN value INTEGER DEFAULT 100;
```

The `DEFAULT` expression here is non-volatile, meaning that Postgres can apply [an optimization](https://brandur.org/postgres-default) when adding the column - rather than rewriting the table to populate every row with the new `DEFAULT`, Postgres applies the `DEFAULT` lazily. The entry in the system catalog `pg_attribute` for the new column is updated to record that there is a default value for the column that should be populated on-the-fly whenever the column is read.

By contrast, consider this `ALTER TABLE` operation:

```sql
ALTER TABLE items ADD COLUMN value INTEGER DEFAULT (random()*100)::integer;
```

This time, the `DEFAULT` expression is volatile, meaning that Postgres cannot apply the same optimization as before. Instead, Postgres must rewrite the table to populate the new field with its `DEFAULT` in every row. The table rewrite requires an `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` lock for the duration of the rewrite.

Previously, `pgroll` did not differentiate between these two cases when adding a new column with a `DEFAULT` value, meaning that adding a new column with a volatile `DEFAULT` would take an `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` lock, locking out reads and writes from the affected table for the duration of the table rewrite.

Starting with `pgroll` `v0.10`, `pgroll` now detects whether the `DEFAULT` value for a new column is volatile or non-volatile, and applies the `DEFAULT` differently in each case:

- For non-volatile `DEFAULT` values, `pgroll` applies the `DEFAULT` to the new column directly as before. The operation is a catalog-only update and requires only a very brief `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` lock.
- For a volatile `DEFAULT`, `pgroll` creates the column without a `DEFAULT`, avoiding the table rewrite. The new column is then backfilled with the `DEFAULT` value using `pgroll`'s backfill mechanism. The `DEFAULT` is added to the column on migration completion.

A migration to add a new column with a volatile `DEFAULT` is written:

```json
{
  "name": "29_add_column_with_default",
  "operations": [
    {
      "add_column": {
        "table": "items",
        "up": "(random()*100)::integer",
        "column": {
          "name": "value",
          "type": "integer",
          "default": "(random()*100)::integer"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

The `up` expression used as the backfill must be the same as the `default` expression for the new column. `pgroll` will backfill the new column with the new `DEFAULT` value, and then apply the `DEFAULT` to the column on completion of the migration.

This means that adding columns with volatile `DEFAULT` values no longer requires a potentially long-lived `ACCESS_EXCLUSIVE` lock, making such operations safe to perform on tables with large row counts.

## Conclusion

`pgroll` is open-source; check out [the repository](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll) to get involved.

Many of the features that have gone into this and previous releases have been directly influenced by how users tell us they are using the tool and where it's currently lacking. We welcome any feedback in [issues](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll/issues), or contributions via [pull requests](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll/pulls)!
