why_postgres.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'
alternate_titles:
  - Why are we opening up our Postgres service?
  - Why are we launching a new Postgres platform?
  - A new type of PostgreSQL service
  - Why are we launching a new type of Postgres service
  - Why the world needs a new Postgres cloud service?
description: "We're announcing the next major evolution for the Xata data platform, serverless Postgres."
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/xata-public-release.png
  alt: PostgreSQL
author: Monica Sarbu
date: 03-11-2024
tags: ['announcements']
published: false
slug: why-postgres
---

Starting today, Xata databases and branches are also serverless Postgres databases. This means you can connect to them using any Postgres client and generally use them as you would use any other Postgres database, while **still keeping** everything that you loved about Xata, including instant DB/branch creation, zero cold starts, no pausing/sleeping in case of inactivity, the full-text search engine, the file attachments, and more.

Making this possible was an interesting and large technical challenge (see below in the blog post), but we think it was well worth it and it resulted in a managed Postgres service that is quite different from what you are used to.

## Who are we?

If you haven't heard about Xata before, let's start with some introductions. In November 2022, we [launched](https://xata.io/blog/xata-public-release) the Xata database service with a product that aimed to provide the best possible developer experience for a database. We felt back then that databases have been left behind a little when it comes to modern developer workflows, APIs, and experience in general. So we re-thought things from the ground up, without tying ourselves to any existing database technology.

We imagined our product as the middle ground between Airtable and traditional databases, and we think we've done a pretty good job at sticking to that vision. Like in Airtable, the "xatabases" start instantly, have rich types, have no cold starts, and are never paused. Like in traditional databases, they have no row limitations, have ACID transactions, constraints with referential integrity, and are highly performant.

Since then, a few tens of thousands of developers discovered Xata, used it in their projects, and gave us extremely valuable feedback. As you'll see if you read our [community spotlights](https://xata.io/blog/tags/community), developers appreciate how easy Xata is to get started with and how it feels like a SaaS rather than a DBaaS.

Over the past year, we have released a new [developer workflow](https://xata.io/blog/workflow-github-vercel-netlify-xata) for making schema changes via our branches functionality, and then [File Attachments](https://xata.io/blog/file-attachments), which make it easy to work with large files and images in your database. Both these features generated a [lot](https://x.com/rauchg/status/1651614599874252802?s=20) of [excitement](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=37324370), and we think they push the state of the art just a little bit for [serverless data platforms](https://xata.io/blog/database-platforms-trend).

Recently, we have started on a journey to build the tooling companies need around Postgres to easily build, manage and scale their applications. Our goal is to create a series of open source projects where each aims to solve a pain point users have with Postgres. The first open source tool, [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll), provides zero-downtime and reversible schema migrations for any PostgreSQL database. This has also generated [quite](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=37752366) a bit of [interest](https://simonwillison.net/2024/Jan/30/pgroll/) from the broader Postgres community. Later this week we'll be announcing another open source project that we think you'll love 🦎.

## The serverless Postgres service

This brings us to today's launch: a new serverless Postgres service at the center of the Xata platform. Looking at the Postgres service in isolation (ignoring everything else in the Xata platform), it fares pretty well:

- Separation of compute and storage, providing bottomless storage.
- Optional automatic scaling up and down depending on the load.
- High availability via read replicas in multiple availability zones and automatic failover.
- Support for both native Postgres wire protocol and SQL over HTTP (for easy access from edge functions).
- Support for the most common Postgres extensions.
- The ability to scale up to 1TB of RAM and 128 vCPUs.

We have designed it to optimize for **reliability**, **scalability**, and **cost efficiency**. A few words about each:

#### Reliability

The Xata Postgres service is using AWS Aurora under the hood, a battle-tested service that has been around for a few years and is used by many very large installations. We have been using AWS Aurora since the initial Xata launch and we have a very [good track record]() in terms of reliability. We are now also have an official [SLA]().

Even on the free tier we offer high-availability and redundancy, with replicas running in multiple availability zones. The failover from the primary instance to a replica is automatic and it's guaranteed to have no data loss. At the storage layer, the data is synchronously replicated to six storage nodes across three availability zones.

#### Scalability

Available instance types in Xata go up to 128 vCPUs and 1TB of RAM. Storage can be scaled up to 128TiB per cluster. That is quite a lot of headroom for vertical scaling.

When it comes to horizontal scaling, the fact that you can create databases and branches instantly and that you can move them between clusters without downtime, opens up several architectural possibilities. For example, you can create a logical database for each of your customers, and place them in different regions. This is possible thanks to our [global control plane and logical databases]().

#### Cost efficiency

Xata achieves cost efficiency for as many use cases as possible by offering a high degree of **optionality**. The innovation of the Xata service is that we make it really easy to move from one type of cluster to another, without downtime. This means that you can easily try your workload on different types of clusters and see which one is the most cost-efficient for you.

At small scale, we offer a free tier that includes high-availability and read replicas, no cold-starts, and no instance-pausing-after-a-few-days. We can offer this sustainably because the free tier makes use of [shared clusters]() and auto-scaling.

At large scale, when using [dedicated clusters]() (currently in private alpha) you pay for the resources you use and you have a high degree of control. For example, for predictable load, you can configure a particular instance size, while for unpredictable load, auto-scaling will likely be more cost-efficient. Similarly, you can choose between standard storage and I/O optimized storage, which is more cost-efficient for I/O-heavy workloads.

## The free tier

Given that free plans across the industry tend to die early recently, you might be looking a bit skeptically at our 15GB free storage, HA included, no-cold-starts, too-good-to-be-true free tier. We know that trust is won over many years (and lost in minutes), that we are a startup doing startup-y things, that interest rates _something something_, but we think there are a couple things that are worth saying now.

First, the Xata architecture was built from the start to be able to offer a free tier sustainably, thanks to the use of shared clusters and auto-scaling. Currently, a free **active** database with constant traffic within the rate limits costs us less than $1.5/month. That includes not only Postgres but also Elasticsearch and the replication between them, as well as running a replica for high-availability.
This is possible thanks to our shared clusters (see [The implementation](#the-implementation)) and this cost per free database will go down significantly as we disable search and replication if not used at all, offload databases to cold storage if inactive for several months, and so on. In other words, the cost of a mostly inactive database is close to zero.

Secondly, the free tier is important to us because of the company history. The idea of Xata was born out of a [non-profit](https://www.tupu.io/), when we realised that managing databases is a limiting factor for many small projects. Today I'm proud to say that multiple non-profits are building on top of Xata, some on the free tier.

## The platform

It's quite possible to use Xata as a Postgres service and nothing else, and we couldn't be more happy if you do. However, the way we think about Xata is not as a Postgres DBaaS, but as a **data platform for PostgreSQL**: multiple services and tools, integrated together much closer than in a classical cloud provider, simplifying the way developers build data-centric applications and manage databases.

This is the Xata platform at the high level:

![Xata data platform diagram](images/xata-platform.png)

Data is automatically replicated, including schema changes, via logical replication to Elasticsearch, which serves our search, vector search, and aggregations endpoints, so the areas in which it excels. Files are stored in S3 and served through the Cloudflare CDN. The replication events are used to keep a reference count of the files, so they can be shared between branches, yet deleted when they are no longer needed.

If file attachments or full-text search or vector/hybrid search are important for your application, Xata will likely offer you a better platform to build on top than a classical DBaaS. And it's only the beginning, we are planning to have similar tightly-integrated solutions for time-series, intelligent caching, queuing, and more.

## The implementation

One key concept in the Xata implementation is the notion of _logical database branches_. A database can have multiple branches, and always has at least one, called by default `main`. A database branch is represented in Postgres as a [schema](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-schemas.html), and can be allocated on one of many Postgres clusters around the world, as well as moved from one cluster to another.

This results in a level of decoupling between the logical databases and branches as experienced by the application, and the underlying Postgres instances where they are running. Because the clusters are already provisioned, logical databases and branches can be started instantly and allocated and moved depending on the business needs. This unlocks some interesting use cases, like sharding per tenant where every tenant is a branch, using a logical database for each micro-service, or automatically creating developer branches for each pull request. We use this logical separation in our free tier, where many small databases and branches share the same relatively large underlying Postgres cluster.

![Database branches scheduled on various Postgres clusters](images/branches-clusters.png)

In order to make this possible, however, we had to solve several challenges: route traffic to the correct cluster based on metadata about the database branch, ensure that a branch level connection can only access that single branch, ensure that attackers can't call dangerous SQL functions, and limit noisy-neighbour issues in the shared clusters.

#### SQL Proxy

The key to the solution for most of these issues is our SQL Proxy technology. While there are many Postgres proxies available (e.g. pgbouncer), the Xata SQL Proxy not only speaks the Postgres wire protocol, but also understands the SQL being executed at a fairly deep level. It can, for example, know which tables are accessed, which columns are requests, which functions are being called, with which parameters, and so on. This allows us to block actions that we know would be dangerous for the Postgres cluster. While the security is mostly ensured via Postgres roles, the Proxy can enforce rate and concurrency limits on shared clusters (we don't do that for dedicated clusters).

The Proxy allows us to "virtualize" access not only to the branch, but also to the Postgres catalog of tables, functions, sequences, and so on. ORMs like Prisma and Drizzle do fairly complex introspection to see the tables and columns that are currently defined, and we wanted to make sure they work without any modifications.

You might be wondering why we chose to represent database branches as Postgres schemas rather than Postgres database. The reason has to do with logical replication, which is a key component of the data platform, because reliable change-data-capture (CDC) is such an important feature keeping multiple data stores in sync. Individual databases would have forced us to do a replication slot for each.

#### Logical replication events

Speaking of logical replication, another challenge that we had to solve was getting not only data events but also schema events from Postgres. A well known limitation of the Postgres logical replication system is that it only includes data changes, no DDL changes. Yet, having schema changes in the same stream of events simplifies significantly the downstream consumers for the logical replication events. The way we solve this is by installing [DDL event triggers](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/event-triggers.html) that are writing the schema changes to an "out-box" table, which gets replicated via the same replication slot.

We think this tech will be useful for many Postgres applications, so we are planning to open source it soon as its own project.

#### Integrated pgroll

Finally, we have integrated [pgroll]() in our platform. pgroll is our open-source project for zero-downtime, reversible schema migrations. While `pgroll` is a CLI tool, in order to integrated it seamlessly in the Xata platform, we have developed a server API for it, which integrates with our control plane. For now, this allows us to keep track of all DDL statements that are being executed and opens the door to a much better schema-changes workflow. Look out for a detailed blog post this week about pgroll and how we integrated it into Xata.

## Get started

The Xata Postgres service is currently in public Beta. You can opt-in to the Beta by flipping a flag in your [workspace's settings](). Once you have enabled the flag, when creating a new database, you can select whether you want to have Postgres direct access or not. Because the underlying changes are significant, at the moment, it's not possible to migrate existing Xata database to the Postgres kind. However, we are planning to provide a migration path during the Beta period.

## Learn more

Want to learn more about the development of this service, the folks that built it and watch a quick demo of it in action? Check out our latest meet the makers session here.

<ArticleVideo platform="youtube" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/d-u2Naheqc4?si=dx9ZfGYTzD95-h26" />

Pop into [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) and say hi if you'd like to dig in further 👋

If you don't yet have a Xata account, there's no better time to [create one](https://app.xata.io/signup)!

[launch-week-blog]: https://xata.io/blog/...

Commit message:

beta notice at the top, clean up wording

why_postgres.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'
alternate_titles:
  - Why are we opening up our Postgres service?
  - Why are we launching a new Postgres platform?
  - A new type of PostgreSQL service
  - Why are we launching a new type of Postgres service
  - Why the world needs a new Postgres cloud service?
description: "We're announcing the next major evolution for the Xata data platform, serverless Postgres."
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/xata-public-release.png
  alt: PostgreSQL
author: Monica Sarbu, Tudor Golubenco
date: 03-11-2024
tags: ['announcements']
published: false
slug: why-postgres
---

Starting today, Xata databases and branches are also serverless Postgres databases. This means you can connect to them using any Postgres client and generally use them as you would use any other Postgres database, while **still keeping** everything that you loved about Xata. This includes instant DB/branch creation, zero cold starts, no pausing/sleeping in case of inactivity, the full-text search engine, the file attachments, and more.

Making this possible was an interesting and large technical challenge, and we'll go into more detail in this blog post. The new Postgres-enabled databases are in public beta, see the [Get started](#get-started) for how to opt-in and use them.

## Who are we?

If you haven't heard about Xata before, let's start with some introductions. In November 2022, we [launched](https://xata.io/blog/xata-public-release) the Xata database service with a product that aimed to provide the best possible developer experience for a database. We felt back then that databases have been left behind a little when it comes to modern developer workflows, APIs, and experience in general. So we re-thought things from the ground up, without tying ourselves to any existing database technology.

We imagined our product as the middle ground between Airtable and traditional databases, and we think we've done a pretty good job at sticking to that vision. Like in Airtable, the "xatabases" start instantly, have rich types, have no cold starts, and are never paused. Like in traditional databases, they have no row limitations, have ACID transactions, constraints with referential integrity, and are highly performant.

Since then, a few tens of thousands of developers discovered Xata, used it in their projects, and gave us extremely valuable feedback. As you'll see if you read our [community spotlights](https://xata.io/blog/tags/community), developers appreciate how easy Xata is to get started with and how it feels like a SaaS rather than a DBaaS.

Over the past year, we have released a new [developer workflow](https://xata.io/blog/workflow-github-vercel-netlify-xata) for making schema changes via our branches functionality, and then [File Attachments](https://xata.io/blog/file-attachments), which make it easy to work with large files and images in your database. Both these features generated a [lot](https://x.com/rauchg/status/1651614599874252802?s=20) of [excitement](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=37324370), and we think they push the state of the art just a little bit for [serverless data platforms](https://xata.io/blog/database-platforms-trend).

Recently, we have started on a journey to build the tooling companies need around Postgres to easily build, manage and scale their applications. Our goal is to create a series of open source projects where each aims to solve a pain point users have with Postgres. The first open source tool, [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll), provides zero-downtime and reversible schema migrations for any PostgreSQL database. This has also generated [quite](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=37752366) a bit of [interest](https://simonwillison.net/2024/Jan/30/pgroll/) from the broader Postgres community. Later this week we'll be announcing another open source project that we think you'll love 🦎.

## The serverless Postgres service

This brings us to today's launch: a new serverless Postgres service at the center of the Xata platform. Looking at the Postgres service in isolation (ignoring everything else in the Xata platform), it fares pretty well:

- Separation of compute and storage, providing bottomless storage.
- Optional automatic scaling up and down depending on the load.
- High availability via read replicas in multiple availability zones and automatic failover.
- Support for both native Postgres wire protocol and SQL over HTTP (for easy access from edge functions).
- Support for the most common Postgres extensions.
- The ability to scale up to 1TB of RAM and 128 vCPUs.

We have designed it to optimize for **reliability**, **scalability**, and **cost efficiency**. A few words about each:

#### Reliability

The Xata Postgres service is using AWS Aurora under the hood, a battle-tested service that has been around for a few years and is used by many very large installations. We have been using AWS Aurora since the initial Xata launch and we have a very [good track record]() in terms of reliability. We are now also have an official [SLA]().

Even on the free tier we offer high-availability and redundancy, with replicas running in multiple availability zones. The failover from the primary instance to a replica is automatic and it's guaranteed to have no data loss. At the storage layer, the data is synchronously replicated to six storage nodes across three availability zones.

#### Scalability

Available instance types in Xata go up to 128 vCPUs and 1TB of RAM. Storage can be scaled up to 128TiB per cluster. That is quite a lot of headroom for vertical scaling.

When it comes to horizontal scaling, the fact that you can create databases and branches instantly and that you can move them between clusters without downtime, opens up several architectural possibilities. For example, you can create a logical database for each of your customers, and place them in different regions. This is possible thanks to our [global control plane and logical databases]().

#### Cost efficiency

Xata achieves cost efficiency for as many use cases as possible by offering a high degree of **optionality**. The innovation of the Xata service is that we make it really easy to move from one type of cluster to another, without downtime. This means that you can easily try your workload on different types of clusters and see which one is the most cost-efficient for you.

At small scale, we offer a free tier that includes high-availability and read replicas, no cold-starts, and no instance-pausing-after-a-few-days. We can offer this sustainably because the free tier makes use of [shared clusters]() and auto-scaling.

At large scale, when using [dedicated clusters]() (currently in private alpha) you pay for the resources you use and you have a high degree of control. For example, for predictable load, you can configure a particular instance size, while for unpredictable load, auto-scaling will likely be more cost-efficient. Similarly, you can choose between standard storage and I/O optimized storage, which is more cost-efficient for I/O-heavy workloads.

## The free tier

Given that free plans across the industry tend to die early recently, you might be looking a bit skeptically at our 15GB free storage, HA included, no-cold-starts, too-good-to-be-true free tier. We know that trust is won over many years (and lost in minutes), that we are a startup doing startup-y things, that interest rates _something something_, but we think there are a couple things that are worth saying now.

First, the Xata architecture was built from the start to be able to offer a free tier sustainably, thanks to the use of shared clusters and auto-scaling. Currently, a free **active** database with constant traffic within the rate limits costs us less than $1.5/month. That includes not only Postgres but also Elasticsearch and the replication between them, as well as running a replica for high-availability.
This is possible thanks to our shared clusters (see [The implementation](#the-implementation)) and this cost per free database will go down significantly as we disable search and replication if not used at all, offload databases to cold storage if inactive for several months, and so on. In other words, the cost of a mostly inactive database is close to zero.

Secondly, the free tier is important to us because of the company history. The idea of Xata was born out of a [non-profit](https://www.tupu.io/), when we realised that managing databases is a limiting factor for many small projects. Today I'm proud to say that multiple non-profits are building on top of Xata, some on the free tier.

## The platform

It's quite possible to use Xata as a Postgres service and nothing else, and we couldn't be more happy if you do. However, the way we think about Xata is not as a Postgres DBaaS, but as a **data platform for PostgreSQL**: multiple services and tools, integrated together much closer than in a classical cloud provider, simplifying the way developers build data-centric applications and manage databases.

This is the Xata platform at the high level:

![Xata data platform diagram](images/xata-platform.png)

Data is automatically replicated, including schema changes, via logical replication to Elasticsearch, which serves our search, vector search, and aggregations endpoints, so the areas in which it excels. Files are stored in S3 and served through the Cloudflare CDN. The replication events are used to keep a reference count of the files, so they can be shared between branches, yet deleted when they are no longer needed.

If file attachments or full-text search or vector/hybrid search are important for your application, Xata will likely offer you a better platform to build on top than a classical DBaaS. And it's only the beginning, we are planning to have similar tightly-integrated solutions for time-series, intelligent caching, queuing, and more.

## The implementation

One key concept in the Xata implementation is the notion of _logical database branches_. A database can have multiple branches, and always has at least one, called by default `main`. A database branch is represented in Postgres as a [schema](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-schemas.html), and can be allocated on one of many Postgres clusters around the world, as well as moved from one cluster to another.

This results in a level of decoupling between the logical databases and branches as experienced by the application, and the underlying Postgres instances where they are running. Because the clusters are already provisioned, logical databases and branches can be started instantly and allocated and moved depending on the business needs. This unlocks some interesting use cases, like sharding per tenant where every tenant is a branch, using a logical database for each micro-service, or automatically creating developer branches for each pull request. We use this logical separation in our free tier, where many small databases and branches share the same relatively large underlying Postgres cluster.

![Database branches scheduled on various Postgres clusters](images/branches-clusters.png)

In order to make this possible, however, we had to solve several challenges: route traffic to the correct cluster based on metadata about the database branch, ensure that a branch level connection can only access that single branch, ensure that attackers can't call dangerous SQL functions, and limit noisy-neighbour issues in the shared clusters.

#### SQL Proxy

The key to the solution for most of these issues is our SQL Proxy technology. While there are many Postgres proxies available (e.g. pgbouncer), the Xata SQL Proxy not only speaks the Postgres wire protocol, but also understands the SQL being executed at a fairly deep level. It can, for example, know which tables are accessed, which columns are requests, which functions are being called, with which parameters, and so on. This allows us to block actions that we know would be dangerous for the Postgres cluster. While the security is mostly ensured via Postgres roles, the Proxy can enforce rate and concurrency limits on shared clusters (we don't do that for dedicated clusters).

The Proxy allows us to "virtualize" access not only to the branch, but also to the Postgres catalog of tables, functions, sequences, and so on. ORMs like Prisma and Drizzle do fairly complex introspection to see the tables and columns that are currently defined, and we wanted to make sure they work without any modifications.

You might be wondering why we chose to represent database branches as Postgres schemas rather than Postgres database. The reason has to do with logical replication, which is a key component of the data platform, because reliable change-data-capture (CDC) is such an important feature keeping multiple data stores in sync. Individual databases would have forced us to do a replication slot for each.

#### Logical replication events

Speaking of logical replication, another challenge that we had to solve was getting not only data events but also schema events from Postgres. A well known limitation of the Postgres logical replication system is that it only includes data changes, no DDL changes. Yet, having schema changes in the same stream of events simplifies significantly the downstream consumers for the logical replication events. The way we solve this is by installing [DDL event triggers](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/event-triggers.html) that are writing the schema changes to an "out-box" table, which gets replicated via the same replication slot.

We think this tech will be useful for many Postgres applications, so we are planning to open source it soon as its own project.

#### Integrated pgroll

Finally, we have integrated [pgroll]() in our platform. pgroll is our open-source project for zero-downtime, reversible schema migrations. While `pgroll` is a CLI tool, in order to integrated it seamlessly in the Xata platform, we have developed a server API for it, which integrates with our control plane. For now, this allows us to keep track of all DDL statements that are being executed and opens the door to a much better schema-changes workflow. Look out for a detailed blog post this week about pgroll and how we integrated it into Xata.

## Get started

The Xata Postgres service is currently in public Beta. You can opt-in to the Beta by flipping a flag in your [workspace's settings](). Once you have enabled the flag, when creating a new database, you can select whether you want to have Postgres direct access or not. Because the underlying changes are significant, at the moment, it's not possible to migrate existing Xata database to the Postgres kind. However, we are planning to provide a migration path during the Beta period.

## Learn more

Want to learn more about the development of this service, the folks that built it and watch a quick demo of it in action? Check out our latest meet the makers session here.

<ArticleVideo platform="youtube" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/d-u2Naheqc4?si=dx9ZfGYTzD95-h26" />

Pop into [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) and say hi if you'd like to dig in further 👋

If you don't yet have a Xata account, there's no better time to [create one](https://app.xata.io/signup)!

[launch-week-blog]: https://xata.io/blog/...
